@c Copyright *C( 2015 Embecosm Limited
@c Copyright (C) 1988-2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the LLVM manual, a derivative of the GCC manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file llvm.texi.

@ignore
@c man begin INCLUDE
@include llvm-vers.texi
@c man end

@c man begin COPYRIGHT
Copyright @copyright{} 2015 Embecosm Limited
Copyright @copyright{} 1988-2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'' and ``Funding
Free Software'', the Front-Cover texts being (a, c) (see below), and with
the Back-Cover Texts being (b, d) (see below).  A copy of the license is
included in the gfdl(7) man page.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.

(c) Embecosm's Front-Cover Text is:

     Derivative Manual for LLVM

(d) Embecosm's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this manual.  Copies
     published by Embecosm support introducing others to free and open
     source software and hardware.
@c man end
@c Set file name and title for the man page.
@setfilename llvm
@settitle LLVM C and C++ compiler
@c man begin SYNOPSIS
clang [@option{-c}|@option{-S}|@option{-E}] [@option{-std=}@var{standard}]
      [@option{-g}] [@option{-pg}] [@option{-O}@var{level}]
      [@option{-W}@var{warn}@dots{}] [@option{-Wpedantic}]
      [@option{-I}@var{dir}@dots{}] [@option{-L}@var{dir}@dots{}]
      [@option{-D}@var{macro}[=@var{defn}]@dots{}] [@option{-U}@var{macro}]
      [@option{-f}@var{option}@dots{}] [@option{-m}@var{machine-option}@dots{}]
      [@option{-o} @var{outfile}] [@@@var{file}] @var{infile}@dots{}

Only the most useful options are listed here; see below for the
remainder.
@c man end
@c man begin SEEALSO
gpl(7), gfdl(7), fsf-funding(7),
gcov(1), as(1), ld(1), gdb(1), adb(1), dbx(1), sdb(1)
and the Info entries for @file{llvm}, @file{as},
@file{ld}, @file{binutils} and @file{gdb}.
@c man end
@c man begin BUGS
For instructions on reporting bugs, see
@w{@value{BUGURL}}.
@c man end
@c man begin AUTHOR
LLVM does not have an active tracking of all its contributors,
although they can be found at
@uref{https://www.openhub.net/p/llvm/contributors}.  The LLVM user
manual is derived from its GCC equivalent, whose contributors can be
found in the Info entry for @command{clang}., or at
@w{@uref{http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Contributors.html}}.
@c man end
@end ignore

@node Invoking LLVM
@chapter Clang/LLVM Command Options
@cindex LLVM command options
@cindex Clang/LLVM command options
@cindex command options
@cindex options, LLVM command
@cindex options, Clang command

@c man begin DESCRIPTION
When you invoke Clang/LLVM, it normally does preprocessing, compilation,
assembly and linking.  The ``overall options'' allow you to stop this
process at an intermediate stage.  For example, the @option{-c} option
says not to run the linker.  Then the output consists of object files
output by the assembler.

Other options are passed on to one stage of processing.  Some options
control the preprocessor and others the compiler itself.  Yet other
options control the assembler and linker; most of these are not
documented here, since you rarely need to use any of them.

Clang/LLVM is invoked by the @command{clang} command for C/ObjectiveC
and by the @command{clang++} command for C++/ObjectiveC++.  Unlike
GCC, a LLVM compiler is usually built to support @emph{all} backends,
and by default @command{clang} or @command{clang++} will compile for
the architecture on which it is running (the @dfn{native} target).
Clang/LLVM can be used as a cross-compiler by using the @option{-mcpu}
option.  Alternatively the @command{clang} and @command{clang++}
commands can be renamed or symbolically linked to
@command{@var{arch}-cc} and @command{@var{arch}-c++} respectively,
when they will compile for the architecture @var{arch}.  So for
example the following will both cross-compile for the MIPS
architecture.

@smallexample
clang -mcpu=mips ...
mips-cc ...
@end smallexample

@cindex C compilation options
Most of the command-line options that you can use with LLVM are useful
for C programs; when an option is only useful with another language
(usually C++), the explanation says so explicitly.  If the description
for a particular option does not mention a source language, you can use
that option with all supported languages.

@cindex C++ compilation options
@xref{Invoking Clang/LLVM for C++,,Compiling C++ Programs}, for a
summary of special options for compiling C++ programs.

@cindex grouping options
@cindex options, grouping
The @command{clang} program accepts options and file names as operands.  Many
options have multi-letter names; therefore multiple single-letter options
may @emph{not} be grouped: @option{-dv} is very different from @w{@samp{-d
-v}}.

@cindex order of options
@cindex options, order
You can mix options and other arguments.  For the most part, the order
you use doesn't matter.  Order does matter when you use several
options of the same kind; for example, if you specify @option{-L} more
than once, the directories are searched in the order specified.  Also,
the placement of the @option{-l} option is significant.

Many options have long names starting with @samp{-f} or with
@samp{-W}---for example,
@option{-fmove-loop-invariants}, @option{-Wformat} and so on.  Most of
these have both positive and negative forms; the negative form of
@option{-ffoo} is @option{-fno-foo}.  This manual documents
only one of these two forms, whichever one is not the default.

@c man end

@xref{Option Index}, for an index to LLVM's options.

@menu
* Option Summary::      Brief list of all options, without explanations.
* Overall Options::     Controlling the kind of output:
                        an executable, object files, assembler files,
                        or preprocessed source.
* Invoking Clang/LLVM for C++:: Compiling C++ programs.
* C Dialect Options::   Controlling the variant of C language compiled.
* C++ Dialect Options:: Variations on C++.
* Objective-C and Objective-C++ Dialect Options:: Variations on Objective-C
                        and Objective-C++.
* Language Independent Options:: Controlling how diagnostics should be
                        formatted.
* Warning Options::     How picky should the compiler be?
* Debugging Options::   Symbol tables, measurements, and debugging dumps.
* Optimize Options::    How much optimization?
* Instrumentation Options:: Enabling profiling and extra run-time error checking.
* Preprocessor Options:: Controlling header files and macro definitions.
                         Also, getting dependency information for Make.
* Assembler Options::   Passing options to the assembler.
* Link Options::        Specifying libraries and so on.
* Directory Options::   Where to find header files and libraries.
                        Where to find the compiler executable files.
* Spec Files::          How to pass switches to sub-processes.
* Target Options::      Running a cross-compiler, or an old version of LLVM.
* Submodel Options::    Specifying minor hardware or convention variations,
                        such as 68010 vs 68020.
* Code Gen Options::    Specifying conventions for function calls, data layout
                        and register usage.
* Environment Variables:: Env vars that affect LLVM.
* Precompiled Headers:: Compiling a header once, and using it many times.
@end menu

@c man begin OPTIONS

@node Option Summary
@section Option Summary

Here is a summary of all the options, grouped by type.  Explanations are
in the following sections.  For convenience, options supported by LLVM
and not by GCC and vice-versa are indicated in each section below.

The following target architectures supported by GCC are not supported
by LLVM: Adapteva Epiphany, ARC, Blackfin, C6X, CRIS, CR16, DEC
Alpha, FR30, FRV, H8/300, HPPA, IA-64, LM32, M32R/D, M32C, M680x0,
MCore, MeP, MicroBlaze, MMIX, MN10300, Moxie, NDS32, Nios II, PDP-11,
picoChip, RL78, RS/6000, RX, Score, SH, SPU, TILE-Gx,
TILEPro, V850, VAX, Visium, Xstormy16, Xtensa.

The following target architectures are supported by LLVM, but not by
GCC: Hexagon, XCore.

@table @emph
@item Overall Options
@xref{Overall Options,,Options Controlling the Kind of Output}.

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{@@@var{file}
@    -###
@    -c
@    -E
@    -fplugin=@var{file}
@    --help
@    -o @var{file}
@    -pipe
@gol -S
@    -v
@    --version
@    -x @var{language}
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{-fbuild-session-file=@var{file}
@    -fbuild-session-timestamp=@var{secs}
@gol -emit-ast
@    -emit-llvm
@    --gcc-toolchain=@var{dir}
@    -help
@    -ObjC
@gol -ObjC++
@    -Qunused-arguments
@    -working-directory @var{dir}
@    -Xclang
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fdump-ada-spec@r{[}-slim@r{]}
@    -fada-spec-parent=@var{unit}
@gol -fdump-go-spec=@var{file}
@    -fno-canonical-system-headers
@gol -fplugin-arg-@var{name}=@var{arg}
@    --help=@var{class}@r{[},@dots{}@r{]}
@gol -pass-exit-codes
@    -specs=@var{file}
@    --target-help
@    -wrapper
}


@item C Language Options
@xref{C Dialect Options,,Options Controlling C Dialect}.

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{-ansi
@    -ffreestanding
@    -fgnu89-inline
@    -fhosted
@gol -flax-vector-conversions
@    -fms-extensions
@    -fno-asm
@    -fno-builtin
@gol -fno-builtin-@var{function}
@    -fopenmp
@    -fsigned-bitfields
@    -fsigned-char
@gol -funsigned-bitfields
@    -funsigned-char
@    -std=@var{standard}
@    -traditional
@gol -trigraphs
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{-fblocks
@    -fborland-extensions
@    -femit-all-decls
@gol -fms-compatibility
@    -fms-compatibility-version=@var{num}
@gol -fmsc-version=@var{num}
@    -fno-gnu-inline-asm
@    -fno-spell-checking
@gol -fpascal-strings
@    -funique-section-names
@    -fwritable-strings
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-aux-info @var{filename}
@    -fallow-parameterless-variadic-functions
@gol -fcilkplus
@    -fgnu-tm
@    -fcond-mismatch
@    -fopenacc
@gol -fopenmp-simd
@    -fplan9-extensions
@    -fsso-struct=@var{endianness}
@gol -traditional-cpp
}

@item C++ Language Options
@xref{C++ Dialect Options,,Options Controlling C++ Dialect}.

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fno-access-control
@    -fcheck-new
@    -fconstexpr-depth=@var{n}
@gol -ffor-scope
@    -ffriend-injection
@    -fms-extensions
@gol -fno-elide-constructors
@    -fno-gnu-keywords
@    -fno-implicit-templates
@gol -fno-implement-inlines
@    -fno-operator-names
@    -fno-rtti
@gol -fno-threadsafe-statics
@    -fpermissive
@    -fsized-deallocation
@gol -ftemplate-backtrace-limit=@var{n}
@    -ftemplate-depth=@var{n}
@    -fuse-cxa-atexit
@gol -fvisibility-inlines-hidden
@    -fvisibility-ms-compat
@    -nostdinc++
@gol -Wabi
@    -Wconversion-null
@    -Wctor-dtor-privacy
@    -Wdelete-non-virtual-dtor
@gol -Weffc++
@    -Wnarrowing
@    -Wnon-virtual-dtor
@    -Wold-style-cast
@gol -Woverloaded-virtual
@    -Wreorder
@    -Wsign-promo
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{-fcxx-exceptions
@    -fdelayed-template-parsing
@gol -fno-assume-sane-operator-new
@    -fshow-overloads=@var{opt}
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fabi-version=@var{n}
@    -fabi-compat-version=@var{n}
@    -fdeduce-init-list
@gol -fext-numeric-literals
@    -fno-enforce-eh-specs
@    -fno-for-scope
@gol -fno-implicit-inline-templates
@    -fno-nonansi-builtins
@gol -fno-optional-diags
@    -fno-pretty-templates
@    -fno-weak
@gol -fnothrow-opt
@    -frepo
@    -Wabi=@var{n}
@    -Wabi-tag
@    -Wliteral-suffix
@gol -Wmultiple-inheritance
@    -Wnamespaces
@    -Wno-non-template-friend
@gol -Wno-pmf-conversions
@    -Wno-terminate
@    -Wnoexcept
@gol -Wstrict-null-sentinel
@    -Wtemplates
@    -Wvirtual-inheritance
}

@item Objective-C and Objective-C++ Language Options
@xref{Objective-C and Objective-C++ Dialect Options,,Options Controlling
Objective-C and Objective-C++ Dialects}.

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fconstant-string-class=@var{class-name}
@    -fgnu-runtime
@gol -fnext-runtime
@    -fobjc-abi-version=@var{n}
@    -fobjc-call-cxx-cdtors
@gol -fobjc-exceptions
@    -fobjc-gc
@    -objcmt-atomic-property
@gol -objcmt-migrate-@var{category}
@    -objcmt-ns-nonatomic-iosonly
@gol -objcmt-returns-innerpointer-property
@    -Wno-protocol
@gol -Wselector
@    -Wstrict-selector-match
@    -Wundeclared-selector
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{-fno-constant-cfstrings
@    -fobjc-arc
@    -fobjc-arc-exceptions
@gol -fobjc-gc-only
@    -fobjc-runtime=@var{runtime}
@gol -objcmt-whitelist-dir-path=@var{dir}
@    -rewrite-legacy-objc
@    -rewrite-objc
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fextern-tls-init
@    -fivar-visibility=@r{[}public@r{|}protected@r{|}private@r{|}package@r{]}
@gol -fno-default-inline
@    -fno-lifetime-dse
@    -fno-local-ivars
@gol -fno-nil-receivers
@    -fobjc-direct-dispatch
@    -fobjc-nilcheck
@gol -fobjc-std=@var{std}
@    -freplace-objc-classes
@    -fzero-link
@    -gen-decls
@gol -print-objc-runtime-info
@    -Wassign-intercept
}

@item Language Independent Options
@xref{Language Independent Options,,Options to Control Diagnostic Messages Formatting}.

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fdiagnostics-color@r{[}=auto@r{|}never@r{|}always@r{]}
@gol -fdiagnostics-show-location=@r{[}once@r{|}every-line@r{]}
@gol -fmessage-length=@var{n}
@    -fno-diagnostics-show-option
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{-fansi-escape-codes
@    -fcolor-diagnostics
@gol -fdiagnostics-parseable-fixits
@gol -fdiagnostics-print-source-range-info
@gol -fdiagnostics-show-note-include-stack
@gol -fdiagnostics-show-template-tree
@gol -fno-diagnostics-fixit-info
@    -fno-elide-type
@gol -fno-show-source-location
@    -serialize-diagnostics @var{file}
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fno-diagnostics-show-caret
}

@item Warning Options
@xref{Warning Options,,Options to Request or Suppress Warnings}.

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fsyntax-only
@    -pedantic
@    -pedantic-errors
@    -w
@    -Wall
@gol -Werror@r{[}=@var{warning}@r{]}
@    -Wextra
@    -Wfatal-errors
@    -Wpedantic
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{-Weverything
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fmax-errors=@var{n}
}


@item Language Independent Warning Options

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{-Waddress
@    -Waggregate-return
@    -Warray-bounds
@    -Wno-attributes
@gol -Wno-builtin-macro-redefined
@    -Wc++-compat
@    -Wc++0x-compat
@gol -Wc++11-compat
@    -Wc++14-compat
@    -Wcast-align
@    -Wcast-qual
@gol -Wchar-subscripts
@    -Wcomment
@    -Wcomments
@    -Wconversion
@    -Wdate-time
@gol -Wdelete-incomplete
@    -Wno-deprecated
@    -Wno-deprecated-declarations
@gol -Wdisabled-optimization
@    -Wno-div-by-zero
@    -Wdouble-promotion
@gol -Wempty-body
@    -Wno-endif-labels
@    -Wenum-compare
@    -Wfloat-conversion
@gol -Wfloat-equal
@    -Wformat@r{[}=0@r{|}2@r{]}
@    -Wno-format-extra-args
@    -Wformat-nonliteral
@gol -Wformat-security
@    -Wformat-y2k
@    -Wformat-zero-length
@gol -Wframe-larger-than=@var{len}
@    -Wignored-qualifiers
@    -Wimplicit
@gol -Wimplicit-function-declaration
@    -Wimplicit-int
@gol -Wincompatible-pointer-types
@    -Wno-inherited-variadic-ctor
@    -Winit-self
@gol -Winline
@    -Wno-int-conversion
@    -Wno-int-to-pointer-cast
@gol -Wno-invalid-offsetof
@    -Winvalid-pch
@    -Wlarger-than=@var{len}
@gol -Wlarger-than-@var{len}
@    -Wlogical-not-parentheses
@    -Wlong-long
@    -Wmain
@gol -Wmissing-braces
@    -Wmissing-field-initializers
@gol -Wmissing-format-attribute
@    -Wmissing-include-dirs
@    -Wmissing-noreturn
@gol -Wno-multichar
@    -Wnonnull
@    -Wnull-dereference
@    -Wodr
@    -Wno-overflow
@gol -Woverlength-strings
@    -Wpacked
@    -Wpadded
@    -Wparentheses
@gol -Wpointer-arith
@    -Wno-pointer-to-int-cast
@    -Wno-pragmas
@gol -Wredundant-decls
@    -Wreturn-type
@    -Wsequence-point
@gol -Wshadow
@    -Wno-shadow-ivar
@    -Wshift-count-negative
@gol -Wshift-count-overflow
@    -Wshift-negative-value
@    -Wshift-overflow
@gol -Wsign-compare
@    -Wsign-conversion
@    -Wsizeof-array-argument
@gol -Wsizeof-pointer-memaccess
@    -Wstack-protector
@    -Wstrict-aliasing@r{[}=1@r{|}2@r{]}
@gol -Wstrict-overflow@r{[}=@var{n}@r{]}
@    -Wswitch
@    -Wswitch-bool
@    -Wswitch-default
@gol -Wswitch-enum
@    -Wsystem-headers
@    -Wtautological-compare
@    -Wtrigraphs
@gol -Wtype-limits
@    -Wundef
@    -Wuninitialized
@    -Wunknown-pragmas
@    -Wunused
@gol -Wunused-const-variable
@    -Wunused-function
@    -Wunused-label
@gol -Wunused-local-typedefs
@    -Wunused-parameter
@    -Wno-unused-result
@gol -Wunused-value
@    -Wunused-variable
@    -Wno-varargs
@    -Wvariadic-macros
@gol -Wvla
@    -Wvolatile-register-var
@    -Wwrite-strings
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{-Wno-abstract-final-class
@    -Wabstract-vbase-init
@gol -Waddress-of-array-temporary
@    -Waddress-of-temporary
@    -Wambiguous-macro
@gol -Wambiguous-member-template
@    -Wanalyzer-incompatible-plugin
@gol -Wanonymous-pack-parens
@    -Warc-bridge-casts-disallowed-in-nonarc
@gol -Warc
@    -Warc-maybe-repeated-use-of-weak
@    -Warc-non-pod-memaccess
@gol -Warc-performSelector-leaks
@    -Warc-repeated-use-of-weak
@gol -Warc-retain-cycles
@    -Warc-unsafe-retained-assign
@gol -Warray-bounds-pointer-arithmetic
@    -Wasm
@    -Wasm-operand-widths
@gol -Wno-assign-enum
@    -Watomic-properties
@gol -Watomic-property-with-user-defined-accessor
@    -Wno-auto-import
@gol -Wno-auto-storage-class
@    -Wauto-var-id
@gol -Wavailability
@    -Wbackslash-newline-escape
@    -Wbad-array-new-length
@gol -Wbind-to-temporary-copy
@    -Wbitfield-constant-conversion
@gol -Wbitwise-op-parentheses
@    -Wbool-conversion
@    -Wbool-conversions
@gol -Wbridge-cast
@    -Wbuiltin-requires-header
@    -Wc++0x-extensions
@gol -Wc++0x-narrowing
@    -Wc++11-compat-pedantic
@gol -Wc++11-compat-reserved-user-defined-literal
@    -Wc11-extensions
@gol -Wc++11-extensions
@    -Wc++11-extra-semi
@    -Wc++11-long-long
@gol -Wc++11-narrowing
@    -Wc++1y-extensions
@    -Wc++98-c++11-compat
@gol -Wc++98-c++11-compat-pedantic
@    -Wc++98-compat-bind-to-temporary-copy
@gol -Wc++98-compat
@    -Wc++98-compat-local-type-template-args
@gol -Wc++98-compat-pedantic
@    -Wc++98-compat-unnamed-type-template-args
@gol -Wc99-compat
@    -Wno-c99-extensions
@    -Wcast-of-sel-type
@gol -WCFString-literal
@    -Wchar-align
@    -Wcompare-distinct-pointer-types
@gol -Wcomplex-component-init
@    -Wconditional-type-mismatch
@gol -Wconditional-uninitialized
@    -Wconfig-macros
@    -Wconstant-conversion
@gol -Wconstant-logical-operand
@    -Wconstexpr-not-const
@gol -Wconsumed
@    -Wcovered-switch-default
@    -Wcustom-atomic-properties
@gol -Wdangling-else
@    -Wdangling-field
@    -Wdangling-initializer-list
@gol -Wdelegating-ctor-cycles
@    -Wdeprecated-increment-bool
@gol -Wdeprecated-implementations
@    -Wdeprecated-objc-isa-usage
@gol -Wdeprecated-objc-pointer-introspection
@gol -Wdeprecated-objc-pointer-introspection-performSelector
@gol -Wdeprecated-register
@    -Wdeprecated-writable-strings
@gol -Wdirect-ivar-access
@    -Wdisabled-macro-expansion
@gol -Wdiscard-qual
@    -Wdistributed-object-modifiers
@    -Wdivision-by-zero
@gol -Wdocumentation-deprecated-sync
@    -Wdocumentation
@    -Wdocumentation-html
@gol -Wdocumentation-pedantic
@    -Wdocumentation-unknown-command
@gol -Wdollar-in-identifier-extension
@    -Wduplicate-decl-specifier
@gol -Wduplicate-enum
@    -Wduplicate-method-arg
@gol -Wduplicate-method-match
@    -Wdynamic-class-memaccess
@    -Wembedded-directive
@gol -Wempty-translation-unit
@    -Wenum-conversion
@    -Wexit-time-destructors
@gol -Wexplicit-ownership-type
@    -Wextended-offsetof
@    -Wextern-c-compat
@gol -Wextern-initializer
@    -Wno-extra-qualification
@    -Wextra-semi
@gol -Wextra-tokens
@    -Wflexible-array-extensions
@    -Wformat-invalid-specifier
@gol -Wformat-non-iso
@    -Wformat-pedantic
@    -Wfour-char-constants
@gol -Wgcc-compat
@    -Wglobal-constructors
@    -Wgnu-array-member-paren-init
@gol -Wgnu-conditional-omitted-operand
@    -Wgnu-designator
@    -Wgnu
@gol -Wgnu-static-float-init
@    -Wheader-guard
@    -Wheader-hygiene
@gol -Widiomatic-parentheses
@    -Wignored-attributes
@gol -Wimplicit-atomic-properties
@gol -Wimplicit-conversion-floating-point-to-bool
@gol -Wimplicit-exception-spec-mismatch
@    -Wimplicit-fallthrough
@gol -Wimplicit-fallthrough-per-function
@    -Wimplicit-retain-self
@gol -Wimport-preprocessor-directive-pedantic
@gol -Wincompatible-library-redeclaration
@gol -Wincompatible-pointer-types-discards-qualifiers
@gol -Wno-incomplete-module
@    -Wincomplete-implementation
@gol -Wincomplete-umbrella
@    -Winitializer-overrides
@gol -Wint-conversions
@    -Wno-int-to-void-pointer-cast
@gol -Winteger-overflow
@    -Winvalid-constexpr
@    -Winvalid-iboutlet
@gol -Winvalid-noreturn
@    -Winvalid-pp-token
@    -Winvalid-source-encoding
@gol -Winvalid-token-paste
@    -Wno-keyword-compat
@    -Wknr-promoted-parameter
@gol -Wlanguage-extension-token
@    -Wlarge-by-value-copy
@    -Wno-liblto
@gol -Wno-literal-conversion
@    -Wno-literal-range
@    -Wlocal-type-template-args
@gol -Wlogical-op-parentheses
@    -Wloop-analysis
@    -Wmain-return-type
@gol -Wmalformed-warning-check
@    -Wmethod-signatures
@gol -Wmicrosoft
@    -Wmicrosoft-exists
@gol -Wmismatched-parameter-types
@    -Wmismatched-return-types
@gol -Wmismatched-tags
@    -Wmissing-method-return-type
@gol -Wmissing-selector-name
@    -Wmissing-sysroot
@gol -Wmissing-variable-declarations
@    -Wmodule-conflict
@gol -Wmost
@    -Wmultiple-move-vbase
@    -Wnested-anon-types
@gol -Wnewline-eof
@    -Wnon-gcc
@    -Wnon-literal-null-conversion
@gol -Wnon-pod-varargs
@    -Wnonportable-cfstrings
@    -WNSObject-attribute
@gol -Wnull-arithmetic
@    -Wnull-character
@gol -Wnull-conversion
@    -Wobjc-autosynthesis-property-ivar-name-match
@gol -Wobjc-cocoa-api
@    -Wobjc-forward-class-redefinition
@gol -Wobjc-interface-ivars
@    -Wobjc-literal-compare
@gol -Wobjc-method-access
@    -Wobjc-missing-property-synthesis
@gol -Wobjc-missing-super-calls
@    -Wobjc-noncopy-retain-block-property
@gol -Wobjc-nonunified-exceptions
@    -Wobjc-property-implementation
@gol -Wobjc-property-implicit-mismatch
@gol -Wobjc-property-matches-cocoa-ownership-rule
@gol -Wobjc-property-no-attribute
@    -Wobjc-string-concatenation
@gol -Wobjc-property-synthesis
@    -Wobjc-protocol-method-implementation
@gol -Wobjc-protocol-property-synthesis
@    -Wobjc-readonly-with-setter-property
@gol -Wobjc-redundant-api-use
@    -Wobjc-redundant-literal-use
@    -Wobjc-root-class
@gol -Wobjc-string-compare
@    -Wopenmp-clauses
@    -Wno-out-of-line-declaration
@gol -Wover-aligned
@    -Wno-override-module
@gol -Woverloaded-shift-op-parentheses
@    -Woverriding-method-mismatch
@gol -Wparentheses-equality
@    -Wno-pointer-type-mismatch
@gol -W#pragma-messages
@    -Wpredefined-identifier-outside-function
@gol -Wprivate-extern
@    -Wproperty-attribute-mismatch
@gol -Wprotocol-property-synthesis-ambiguity
@gol -Wreadonly-iboutlet-property
@    -Wreceiver-expr
@    -Wreceiver-forward-class
@gol -Wreceiver-is-weak
@    -Wreinterpret-base-class
@gol -Wrequires-super-attribute
@    -Wreserved-user-defined-literal
@gol -Wno-return-stack-address
@    -Wreturn-type-c-linkage
@    -Wsection
@gol -Wselector-type-mismatch
@    -Wself-assign
@    -Wself-assign-field
@gol -Wsemicolon-before-method-body
@    -Wsentinel
@    -Wserialized-diagnostics
@gol -Wshift-op-parentheses
@    -Wshift-sign-overflow
@    -Wshorten-64-to-32
@gol -Wsizeof-array-decay
@    -Wsometimes-uninitialized
@gol -Wsource-uses-openmp
@    -Wstatic-float-init
@    -Wstatic-in-inline
@gol -Wstatic-inline-explicit-instantiation
@    -Wstatic-local-in-inline
@gol -Wstatic-self-init
@    -Wstring-compare
@    -Wstring-conversion
@gol -Wstring-plus-char
@    -Wstring-plus-int
@    -Wstrlcpy-strlcat-size
@gol -Wstrncat-size
@    -Wsuper-class-method-mismatch
@gol -Wtautological-constant-out-of-range-compare
@gol -Wtentative-definition-incomplete-type
@    -Wthread-safety-analysis
@gol -Wthread-safety-attributes
@    -Wthread-safety-beta
@    -Wthread-safety
@gol -Wthread-safety-precise
@    -Wtypedef-redefinition
@    -Wtypename-missing
@gol -Wtype-safety
@    -Wno-unavailable-declarations
@gol -Wundefined-inline
@    -Wundefined-internal
@gol -Wundefined-reinterpret-cast
@    -Wunicode
@    -Wunicode-whitespace
@gol -Wunknown-warning-option
@    -Wunnamed-type-template-args
@gol -Wunneeded-internal-declaration
@    -Wunneeded-member-function
@gol -Wunsequenced
@    -Wno-unsupported-friend
@gol -Wunsupported-visibility
@    -Wunused-command-line-argument
@gol -Wunused-comparison
@    -Wunused-exception-parameter
@gol -Wunused-member-function
@    -Wunused-private-field
@    -Wunused-property-ivar
@gol -Wunused-volatile-lvalue
@    -Wused-but-marked-unused
@gol -Wuser-defined-literals
@    -Wvector-conversion
@    -Wvector-conversions
@gol -Wvexing-parse
@    -Wvisibility
@    -Wvla-extension
@    -W#warnings
@gol -Wweak-template-vtables
@    -Wweak-vtables
@    -Wzero-length-array
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-Wno-aggressive-loop-optimizations
@    -Warray-bounds=@var{n}
@gol -Wbool-compare
@    -Wc90-c99-compat
@    -Wc99-c11-compat
@    -Wclobbered
@gol -Wconditionally-supported
@    -Wcoverage-mismatch
@    -Wno-cpp
@gol -Wno-designated-init
@    -Wno-discarded-array-qualifiers
@gol -Wno-discarded-qualifiers
@    -Wduplicated-cond
@    -Wformat=1
@gol -Wno-format-contains-nul
@    -Wformat-signedness
@    -Wframe-address
@gol -Wno-free-nonheap-object
@    -Whsa
@    -Winvalid-memory-model
@gol -Wjump-misses-init
@    -Wlogical-op
@    -Wlto-type-mismatch
@gol -Wmaybe-uninitialized
@    -Wmemset-transposed-args
@gol -Wmisleading-indentation
@    -Wnormalized=@r{[}none@r{|}id@r{|}nfc@r{|}nfkc@r{]}
@    -Wopenmp-simd
@gol -Woverride-init
@    -Woverride-init-side-effects
@    -Wpacked-bitfield-compat
@gol -Wno-pedantic-ms-format
@    -Wplacement-new
@    -Wno-return-local-addr
@gol -Wno-scalar-storage-order
@    -Wshift-overflow=@var{n}
@    -Wstack-usage=@var{len}
@gol -Wstrict-aliasing=3
@    -Wsubobject-linkage
@gol -Wsuggest-attribute=@r{[}pure@r{|}const@r{|}noreturn@r{|}format@r{]}
@    -Wsuggest-final-methods
@gol -Wsuggest-final-types
@    -Wsuggest-override
@    -Wsync-nand
@gol -Wtrampolines
@    -Wunsafe-loop-optimizations
@gol -Wunsuffixed-float-constants
@    -Wunused-but-set-parameter
@gol -Wunused-but-set-variable
@    -Wuseless-cast
@    -Wvector-operation-performance
@gol -Wno-virtual-move-assign
@    -Wzero-as-null-pointer-constant
}

@item C and Objective-C-only Warning Options

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{-Wbad-function-cast
@    -Wdeclaration-after-statement
@gol -Wmissing-declarations
@    -Wmissing-prototypes
@    -Wnested-externs
@gol -Wold-style-definition
@    -Wpointer-sign
@    -Wstrict-prototypes
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-Wmissing-parameter-type
@    -Wold-style-declaration
@    -Wtraditional
@gol -Wtraditional-conversion
}

@item Debugging Options
@xref{Debugging Options,,Options for Debugging Your Program or Clang/LLVM}.

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fdebug-prefix-map=@var{old}=@var{new}
@    -fdebug-types-section
@gol -fno-dwarf2-cfi-asm
@    -fno-eliminate-unused-debug-types
@gol -g@r{[}@var{level}@r{]}
@    -ggdb@r{[}@var{level}@r{]}
@    -gdwarf@r{[}-@var{version}@r{]}
@    -ggnu-pubnames
@gol -gno-record-gcc-switches
@    -gsplit-dwarf
@    -gstrict-dwarf
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{-fno-standalone-debug
@    -fstandalone-debug
@    -gcodeview
@    -gfull
@gol -gline-tables-only
@    -gmodules
@    -gused
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-feliminate-dwarf2-dups
@    -feliminate-unused-debug-symbols
@gol -femit-class-debug-always
@    -femit-struct-debug-baseonly
@gol -femit-struct-debug-detailed@r{[}=@var{spec-list}@r{]}
@    -femit-struct-debug-reduced
@gol -fno-merge-debug-strings
@    -fvar-tracking
@    -fvar-tracking-assignments
@gol -gcoff@r{[}@var{level}@r{]}
@    -gpubnames
@    -gstabs@r{[}@var{level}@r{]}
@    -gstabs+
@    -gtoggle
@gol -gvms@r{[}@var{level}@r{]}
@    -gxcoff@r{[}@var{level}@r{]}
@    -gxcoff+
@    -gz@r{[}=@var{type}@r{]}
}


@item Optimization Options
@xref{Optimize Options,,Options that Control Optimization}.

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fassociative-math
@    -fdata-sections
@    -ffast-math
@gol -ffinite-math-only
@    -ffp-contract=@var{style}
@    -ffunction-sections
@gol -flto@r{[}full@r{|}thin@r{]}
@    -fno-math-errno
@    -fmerge-all-constants
@    -fno-inline
@gol -fomit-frame-pointer
@    -foptimize-sibling-calls
@    -fprofile-use=@r{[}@var{path}@r{]}
@gol -freciprocal-math
@    -fno-signed-zeros
@    -fstrict-aliasing
@    -fstrict-enums
@gol -fstrict-overflow
@    -fno-trapping-math
@    -ftree-slp-vectorize
@gol -funit-at-a-time
@    -funroll-loops
@    -fno-zero-initialized-in-bss
@gol -funsafe-math-optimizations
@    -ftree-vectorize
@    -O
@    -O0
@    -O1
@    -O2
@gol -O3
@    -Ofast
@    -Os
@    --param ssp-buffer-size=@var{n}
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{-fno-reroll-loops
@    -freroll-loops
@    -fslp-vectorize-aggressive
@gol -fslp-vectorize
@    -fstrict-vtable-pointers
@    -fthinlto-index=@var{file}
@gol -fvectorize
@    -mllvm @var{option}
@    -mrelax-all
@    -O4
@    -Oz
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-faggressive-loop-optimizations
@    -falign-functions[=@var{n}]
@gol -falign-jumps[=@var{n}]
@    -falign-labels[=@var{n}]
@    -falign-loops[=@var{n}]
@gol -fauto-inc-dec
@    -fauto-profile[=@var{path}]
@    -fno-branch-count-reg
@gol -fbranch-probabilities
@    -fbranch-target-load-optimize
@gol -fbranch-target-load-optimize2
@    -fbtr-bb-exclusive -fcaller-saves
@gol -fcombine-stack-adjustments
@    -fcompare-elim
@    -fconserve-stack
@gol -fcprop-registers
@    -fcrossjumping
@    -fcse-follow-jumps
@    -fcse-skip-blocks
@gol -fcx-fortran-rules
@    -fcx-limited-range
@    -fdce
@    -fdeclone-ctor-dtor
@gol -fno-defer-pop
@    -fdelayed-branch
@    -fdelete-null-pointer-checks
@gol -fdevirtualize
@    -fdevirtualize-at-ltrans
@    -fdevirtualize-speculatively
@gol -fdse
@    -fearly-inlining
@    -fexcess-precision=@var{style}
@gol -fexpensive-optimizations
@    -ffat-lto-objects
@    -fipa-sra
@    -ffloat-store
@gol -fforward-propagate
@    -fno-function-cse
@    -fgcse
@    -fgcse-after-reload
@gol -fgcse-las
@    -fgcse-lm
@    -fgcse-sm
@    -fgraphite-identity
@gol -fno-guess-branch-probability
@    -fhoist-adjacent-loads
@    -fif-conversion
@gol -fif-conversion2
@    -findirect-inlining
@    -finline-functions
@gol -finline-functions-called-once
@    -finline-limit=@var{n}
@gol -finline-small-functions
@    -fipa-cp
@    -fipa-cp-alignment
@    -fipa-cp-clone
@gol -fipa-icf
@    -fipa-profile
@    -fipa-pta
@    -fipa-pure-const
@    -fipa-ra
@gol -fipa-reference
@    -fira-algorithm=@var{algorithm}
@    -fira-hoist-pressure
@gol -fira-loop-pressure
@    -fira-region=@var{region}
@    -fno-ira-share-save-slots
@gol -fno-ira-share-spill-slots
@    -fisolate-erroneous-paths-attribute
@gol -fisolate-erroneous-paths-dereference
@    -fivopts
@    -fkeep-inline-functions
@gol -fkeep-static-consts
@    -fkeep-static-functions
@    -flive-range-shrinkage
@gol -floop-block
@    -floop-interchange
@    -floop-nest-optimize
@gol -floop-parallelize-all
@    -floop-strip-mine
@    -floop-unroll-and-jam
@gol -flra-remat
@    -flto-compression-level
@    -flto-partition=@var{alg}
@gol -flto-odr-type-merging
@    -fmerge-constants
@    -fmodulo-sched
@gol -fmodulo-sched-allow-regmoves
@    -fmove-loop-invariants
@    -foptimize-strlen
@gol -fpartial-inlining
@    -fpeel-loops
@    -fno-peephole
@    -fno-peephole2
@gol -fpredictive-commoning
@    -fprefetch-loop-arrays
@    -fprofile-correction
@gol -fprofile-values
@    -fprofile-reorder-functions
@    -free
@gol -frename-registers
@    -freorder-blocks
@gol -freorder-blocks-algorithm=@var{algorithm}
@    -freorder-blocks-and-partition
@gol -freorder-functions
@    -frerun-cse-after-loop
@gol -freschedule-modulo-scheduled-loops
@    -frounding-math
@gol -fsched-critical-path-heuristic
@    -fsched-dep-count-heuristic
@gol -fsched-group-heuristic
@    -fno-sched-interblock
@gol -fsched-last-insn-heuristic
@    -fsched-pressure
@    -fsched-rank-heuristic
@gol -fno-sched-spec
@    -fsched-spec-insn-heuristic
@    -fsched-spec-load
@gol -fsched-spec-load-dangerous
@    -fsched-stalled-insns[=@var{n}]
@gol -fsched-stalled-insns-dep[=@var{n}]
@    -fsched2-use-superblocks
@gol -fschedule-fusion
@    -fschedule-insns
@    -fschedule-insns2
@gol -fsection-anchors
@    -fsel-sched-pipelining
@gol -fsel-sched-pipelining-outer-loops
@    -fselective-scheduling
@gol -fselective-scheduling2
@    -fsemantic-interposition
@    -fshrink-wrap
@gol -fsignaling-nans
@    -fsimd-cost-model=@var{model}
@    -fsingle-precision-constant
@gol -fsplit-ivs-in-unroller
@    -fsplit-paths
@    -fsplit-wide-types
@gol -fssa-backprop
@    -fssa-phiopt
@    -fstdarg-opt
@    -fthread-jumps
@gol -fno-toplevel-reorder
@    -ftracer
@    -ftree-bit-ccp
@gol -ftree-builtin-call-dce
@    -ftree-ccp
@    -ftree-ch
@gol -ftree-coalesce-inlined-vars
@    -ftree-coalesce-vars
@gol -ftree-copy-prop
@    -ftree-copyrename
@    -ftree-dce
@gol -ftree-dominator-opts
@    -ftree-dse
@    -ftree-forwprop
@gol -ftree-fre
@    -ftree-loop-distribute-patterns
@gol -ftree-loop-distribution
@    -ftree-loop-if-convert
@gol -ftree-loop-if-convert-stores
@    -ftree-loop-im
@gol -ftree-loop-ivcanon -ftree-loop-linear
@    -ftree-loop-optimize
@gol -ftree-loop-vectorize
@    -ftree-parallelize-loops=@var{n}
@    -ftree-partial-pre
@gol -ftree-phiprop
@    -ftree-pre
@    -ftree-pta
@gol -ftree-reassoc
@    -ftree-sink
@    -ftree-slsr
@    -ftree-sra
@gol -ftree-switch-conversion
@    -ftree-tail-merge
@    -ftree-ter
@gol -ftree-vrp
@    -funroll-all-loops
@    -funsafe-loop-optimizations
@gol -funswitch-loops
@    -fuse-linker-plugin
@gol -fvariable-expansion-in-unroller
@    -fvect-cost-model
@    -fvpt
@    -fweb
@gol -fwhole-program
@    -Og
@    --param @var{name}=@var{value}
}

@item Program Instrumentation Options
@xref{Instrumentation Options,,Program Instrumentation Options}.

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{--coverage
@    -finstrument-functions
@    -fprofile-arcs
@gol -fprofile-generate@r{[}=@var{path}@r{]}
@    -fsanitize=@var{style}
@gol -fsanitize-recover@r{[}=@var{style}@r{]}
@    -fsanitize-undefined-trap-on-error
@gol -fsplit-stack
@    -fstack-check
@    -fstack-protector
@gol -fstack-protector-all
@    -fstack-protector-strong
@gol -ftest-coverage
@    -pg
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{--analyze
@    -fcoverage-mapping
@    -fprofile-instr-generate@r{[}=@var{file}@r{]}
@gol -fprofile-instr-use@r{[}=@var{file}@r{]}
@    -fprofile-sample-use=@var{file}
@gol -fsanitize-address-field-padding=@var{n}
@    -fsanitize-blacklist=@var{file}
@gol -fsanitize=@var{style}
@    -fsanitize-cfi-cross-dso
@gol -fsanitize-coverage=@var{style}
@    -fsanitize-memory-track-origins@r{[}@var{n}@r{]}
@gol -fsanitize-memory-use-after-dtor
@    -fsanitize-recover=@var{style}
@gol -fsanitize-stats
@    -fsanitize-trap=@var{style}
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-fasan-shadow-offset=@var{number}
@    -fbounds-check
@    -fcheck-data-deps
@gol -fcheck-pointer-bounds
@    -fchkp-check-incomplete-type
@gol -fchkp-first-field-has-own-bounds
@    -fchkp-narrow-bounds
@gol -fchkp-narrow-to-innermost-array
@    -fchkp-optimize
@gol -fchkp-use-fast-string-functions
@    -fchkp-use-nochk-string-functions
@gol -fchkp-use-static-bounds
@    -fchkp-use-static-const-bounds
@gol -fchkp-treat-zero-dynamic-size-as-infinite
@    -fchkp-check-read
@gol -fchkp-check-read
@    -fchkp-check-write
@gol -fchkp-store-bounds
@    -fchkp-instrument-calls
@gol -fchkp-instrument-marked-only
@    -fchkp-use-wrappers
@gol -finstrument-functions-exclude-function-list=@var{sym},@var{sym},@dots{}
@gol -finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list=@var{file},@var{file},@dots{}
@gol -fprofile-dir=@var{path}
@    -fsanitize-coverage=trace-pc
@gol -fsanitize-recover=@var{style}
@    -fsanitize-sections=@var{s1},@var{s2},...
@gol -fno-stack-limit
@    -fstack-limit-register=@var{reg}
@gol -fstack-limit-symbol=@var{sym}
@    -fstack-protector-explicit
@gol -fvtable-verify=@r{[}std@r{|}preinit@r{|}none@r{]}
@    -fvtv-counts
@gol -fvtv-debug
@    -p
}

@item Preprocessor Options
@xref{Preprocessor Options,,Options Controlling the Preprocessor}.

@emph{Options supported by both LLVM and GCC}
@gccoptlist{-C
@    -D@var{macro}@r{[}=@var{defn}@r{]}
@    -dD
@    -dM
@    -E
@    -fdollars-in-identifiers
@gol -fexec-charset=@var{charset}
@    -fextended-identifiers
@    -finput-charset=@var{charset}
@gol -fpch-preprocess
@    -fno-show-column
@    -ftabstop=@var{width}
@    -H
@gol -idirafter @var{dir}
@    -imacros @var{file}
@    -include @var{file}
@    -iprefix @var{file}
@gol -isysroot @var{dir}
@    -isystem @var{dir}
@    -iwithprefix @var{dir}
@    -iwithprefixbefore @var{dir}
@gol -M
@    -MD
@    -MF
@    -MG
@    -MM
@    -MMD
@    -MP
@    -MQ
@    -MT
@    -no-integrated-cpp
@gol -nostdinc
@    -P
@    -trigraphs
@    -U@var{macro}
@    -undef
@    -Wp,@var{option}
@gol -Xpreprocessor
}

@emph{Options only supported by LLVM}
@gccoptlist{-cxx-isystem=@var{file}
@    -fcomment-block-commands=@var{cmd}
@    -fdeclspec
@gol -ftrigraphs
@    -iframework@var{dir}
@    -include-pch @var{file}
@gol -index-header-map
@    -iwithsysroot @var{dir}
@    --migrate
@gol -MV
@    --no-system-header-prefix=@var{prefix}
@    -nobuiltininc
@gol -relocatable-pch
@    --system-header-prefix=@var{prefix}
@    -verify-pch
}

@emph{Options only supported by GCC}
@gccoptlist{-A@var{question}=@var{answer}
@    -A-@var{question}@r{[}=@var{answer}@r{]}
@    -dI
@    -dN
@    -fdebug-cpp
@gol -fdirectives-only
@    -fpch-deps
@    -fpreprocessed
@gol -ftrack-macro-expansion
@    -fwide-exec-charset=@var{charset}
@    -fworking-directory
@gol -imultilib @var{dir}
@    -remap
}

@item Assembler Option
@xref{Assembler Options,,Passing Options to the Assembler}.
@gccoptlist{-Wa,@var{option}  -Xassembler @var{option}}

@item Linker Options
@xref{Link Options,,Options for Linking}.
@gccoptlist{@var{object-file-name}  -fuse-ld=@var{linker} -l@var{library} @gol
-nostartfiles  -nodefaultlibs  -nostdlib -pie -rdynamic @gol
-s  -static -static-libgcc -static-libstdc++ @gol
-static-libasan -static-libtsan -static-liblsan -static-libubsan @gol
-static-libmpx -static-libmpxwrappers @gol
-shared -shared-libgcc  -symbolic @gol
-T @var{script}  -Wl,@var{option}  -Xlinker @var{option} @gol
-u @var{symbol} -z @var{keyword}}

@item Directory Options
@xref{Directory Options,,Options for Directory Search}.
@gccoptlist{-B@var{prefix} -I@var{dir} -iplugindir=@var{dir} @gol
-iquote@var{dir} -L@var{dir} -specs=@var{file} -I- @gol
--sysroot=@var{dir} --no-sysroot-suffix}

@item Machine Dependent Options
@xref{Submodel Options,,Hardware Models and Configurations}.
@c This list is ordered alphanumerically by subsection name.
@c Try and put the significant identifier (CPU or system) first,
@c so users have a clue at guessing where the ones they want will be.

@emph{AArch64 Options}
@gccoptlist{-mabi=@var{name}  -mbig-endian  -mlittle-endian @gol
-mgeneral-regs-only @gol
-mcmodel=tiny  -mcmodel=small  -mcmodel=large @gol
-mstrict-align @gol
-momit-leaf-frame-pointer  -mno-omit-leaf-frame-pointer @gol
-mtls-dialect=desc  -mtls-dialect=traditional @gol
-mfix-cortex-a53-835769  -mno-fix-cortex-a53-835769 @gol
-march=@var{name}  -mcpu=@var{name}  -mtune=@var{name}}

@emph{ARM Options}
@gccoptlist{-mapcs-frame  -mno-apcs-frame @gol
-mabi=@var{name} @gol
-mapcs-stack-check  -mno-apcs-stack-check @gol
-mapcs-float  -mno-apcs-float @gol
-mapcs-reentrant  -mno-apcs-reentrant @gol
-msched-prolog  -mno-sched-prolog @gol
-mlittle-endian  -mbig-endian @gol
-mfloat-abi=@var{name} @gol
-mfp16-format=@var{name}
-mthumb-interwork  -mno-thumb-interwork @gol
-mcpu=@var{name}  -march=@var{name}  -mfpu=@var{name}  @gol
-mstructure-size-boundary=@var{n} @gol
-mabort-on-noreturn @gol
-mlong-calls  -mno-long-calls @gol
-msingle-pic-base  -mno-single-pic-base @gol
-mpic-register=@var{reg} @gol
-mnop-fun-dllimport @gol
-mpoke-function-name @gol
-mthumb  -marm @gol
-mtpcs-frame  -mtpcs-leaf-frame @gol
-mcaller-super-interworking  -mcallee-super-interworking @gol
-mtp=@var{name} -mtls-dialect=@var{dialect} @gol
-mword-relocations @gol
-mfix-cortex-m3-ldrd @gol
-munaligned-access @gol
-mneon-for-64bits @gol
-mslow-flash-data @gol
-masm-syntax-unified @gol
-mrestrict-it}

@emph{Darwin Options}
@gccoptlist{-all_load  -allowable_client  -arch  -arch_errors_fatal @gol
-arch_only  -bind_at_load  -bundle  -bundle_loader @gol
-client_name  -compatibility_version  -current_version @gol
-dead_strip @gol
-dependency-file  -dylib_file  -dylinker_install_name @gol
-dynamic  -dynamiclib  -exported_symbols_list @gol
-filelist  -flat_namespace  -force_cpusubtype_ALL @gol
-force_flat_namespace  -headerpad_max_install_names @gol
-iframework @gol
-image_base  -init  -install_name  -keep_private_externs @gol
-multi_module  -multiply_defined  -multiply_defined_unused @gol
-noall_load   -no_dead_strip_inits_and_terms @gol
-nofixprebinding -nomultidefs  -noprebind  -noseglinkedit @gol
-pagezero_size  -prebind  -prebind_all_twolevel_modules @gol
-private_bundle  -read_only_relocs  -sectalign @gol
-sectobjectsymbols  -whyload  -seg1addr @gol
-sectcreate  -sectobjectsymbols  -sectorder @gol
-segaddr -segs_read_only_addr -segs_read_write_addr @gol
-seg_addr_table  -seg_addr_table_filename  -seglinkedit @gol
-segprot  -segs_read_only_addr  -segs_read_write_addr @gol
-single_module  -static  -sub_library  -sub_umbrella @gol
-twolevel_namespace  -umbrella  -undefined @gol
-unexported_symbols_list  -weak_reference_mismatches @gol
-whatsloaded -F -gused -gfull -mmacosx-version-min=@var{version} @gol
-mkernel -mone-byte-bool}

@emph{Hexagon options}
@gccoptlist{-mieee-rnd-near -mv1 -mv2 -mv3 -mv4 -mv5}

@emph{GNU/Linux Options}
@gccoptlist{-mglibc -muclibc -mbionic -mandroid @gol
-tno-android-cc -tno-android-ld}

@emph{MIPS Options}
@gccoptlist{-EL  -EB  -march=@var{arch}  -mtune=@var{arch} @gol
-mips1  -mips2  -mips3  -mips4  -mips32  -mips32r2  -mips32r3  -mips32r5 @gol
-mips32r6  -mips64  -mips64r2  -mips64r3  -mips64r5  -mips64r6 @gol
-mips16  -mno-mips16  -mflip-mips16 @gol
-minterlink-compressed -mno-interlink-compressed @gol
-minterlink-mips16  -mno-interlink-mips16 @gol
-mabi=@var{abi}  -mabicalls  -mno-abicalls @gol
-mshared  -mno-shared  -mplt  -mno-plt  -mxgot  -mno-xgot @gol
-mgp32  -mgp64  -mfp32  -mfpxx  -mfp64  -mhard-float  -msoft-float @gol
-mno-float  -msingle-float  -mdouble-float @gol
-modd-spreg -mno-odd-spreg @gol
-mabs=@var{mode}  -mnan=@var{encoding} @gol
-mdsp  -mno-dsp  -mdspr2  -mno-dspr2 @gol
-mmcu -mmno-mcu @gol
-meva -mno-eva @gol
-mvirt -mno-virt @gol
-mxpa -mno-xpa @gol
-mmicromips -mno-micromips @gol
-mfpu=@var{fpu-type} @gol
-msmartmips  -mno-smartmips @gol
-mpaired-single  -mno-paired-single  -mdmx  -mno-mdmx @gol
-mips3d  -mno-mips3d  -mmt  -mno-mt  -mllsc  -mno-llsc @gol
-mlong64  -mlong32  -msym32  -mno-sym32 @gol
-G@var{num}  -mlocal-sdata  -mno-local-sdata @gol
-mextern-sdata  -mno-extern-sdata  -mgpopt  -mno-gopt @gol
-membedded-data  -mno-embedded-data @gol
-muninit-const-in-rodata  -mno-uninit-const-in-rodata @gol
-mcode-readable=@var{setting} @gol
-msplit-addresses  -mno-split-addresses @gol
-mexplicit-relocs  -mno-explicit-relocs @gol
-mcheck-zero-division  -mno-check-zero-division @gol
-mdivide-traps  -mdivide-breaks @gol
-mmemcpy  -mno-memcpy  -mlong-calls  -mno-long-calls @gol
-mmad -mno-mad -mimadd -mno-imadd -mfused-madd  -mno-fused-madd  -nocpp @gol
-mfix-24k -mno-fix-24k @gol
-mfix-r4000  -mno-fix-r4000  -mfix-r4400  -mno-fix-r4400 @gol
-mfix-r10000 -mno-fix-r10000  -mfix-rm7000 -mno-fix-rm7000 @gol
-mfix-vr4120  -mno-fix-vr4120 @gol
-mfix-vr4130  -mno-fix-vr4130  -mfix-sb1  -mno-fix-sb1 @gol
-mflush-func=@var{func}  -mno-flush-func @gol
-mbranch-cost=@var{num}  -mbranch-likely  -mno-branch-likely @gol
-mfp-exceptions -mno-fp-exceptions @gol
-mvr4130-align -mno-vr4130-align -msynci -mno-synci @gol
-mrelax-pic-calls -mno-relax-pic-calls -mmcount-ra-address}

@emph{MSP430 Options}
@gccoptlist{-msim -masm-hex -mmcu= -mcpu= -mlarge -msmall -mrelax @gol
-mhwmult= -minrt}

@emph{Nvidia PTX Options}
@gccoptlist{-m32 -m64 -mmainkernel}

@emph{PowerPC Options}
See RS/6000 and PowerPC Options.

@emph{RS/6000 and PowerPC Options}
@gccoptlist{-mcpu=@var{cpu-type} @gol
-mtune=@var{cpu-type} @gol
-mcmodel=@var{code-model} @gol
-mpowerpc64 @gol
-maltivec  -mno-altivec @gol
-mpowerpc-gpopt  -mno-powerpc-gpopt @gol
-mpowerpc-gfxopt  -mno-powerpc-gfxopt @gol
-mmfcrf  -mno-mfcrf  -mpopcntb  -mno-popcntb -mpopcntd -mno-popcntd @gol
-mfprnd  -mno-fprnd @gol
-mcmpb -mno-cmpb -mmfpgpr -mno-mfpgpr -mhard-dfp -mno-hard-dfp @gol
-mfull-toc   -mminimal-toc  -mno-fp-in-toc  -mno-sum-in-toc @gol
-m64  -m32  -mxl-compat  -mno-xl-compat  -mpe @gol
-malign-power  -malign-natural @gol
-msoft-float  -mhard-float  -mmultiple  -mno-multiple @gol
-msingle-float -mdouble-float -msimple-fpu @gol
-mstring  -mno-string  -mupdate  -mno-update @gol
-mavoid-indexed-addresses  -mno-avoid-indexed-addresses @gol
-mfused-madd  -mno-fused-madd  -mbit-align  -mno-bit-align @gol
-mstrict-align  -mno-strict-align  -mrelocatable @gol
-mno-relocatable  -mrelocatable-lib  -mno-relocatable-lib @gol
-mtoc  -mno-toc  -mlittle  -mlittle-endian  -mbig  -mbig-endian @gol
-mdynamic-no-pic  -maltivec -mswdiv  -msingle-pic-base @gol
-mprioritize-restricted-insns=@var{priority} @gol
-msched-costly-dep=@var{dependence_type} @gol
-minsert-sched-nops=@var{scheme} @gol
-mcall-sysv  -mcall-netbsd @gol
-maix-struct-return  -msvr4-struct-return @gol
-mabi=@var{abi-type} -msecure-plt -mbss-plt @gol
-mblock-move-inline-limit=@var{num} @gol
-misel -mno-isel @gol
-misel=yes  -misel=no @gol
-mspe -mno-spe @gol
-mspe=yes  -mspe=no @gol
-mpaired @gol
-mgen-cell-microcode -mwarn-cell-microcode @gol
-mvrsave -mno-vrsave @gol
-mmulhw -mno-mulhw @gol
-mdlmzb -mno-dlmzb @gol
-mfloat-gprs=yes  -mfloat-gprs=no -mfloat-gprs=single -mfloat-gprs=double @gol
-mprototype  -mno-prototype @gol
-msim  -mmvme  -mads  -myellowknife  -memb  -msdata @gol
-msdata=@var{opt}  -mvxworks  -G @var{num}  -pthread @gol
-mrecip -mrecip=@var{opt} -mno-recip -mrecip-precision @gol
-mno-recip-precision @gol
-mveclibabi=@var{type} -mfriz -mno-friz @gol
-mpointers-to-nested-functions -mno-pointers-to-nested-functions @gol
-msave-toc-indirect -mno-save-toc-indirect @gol
-mpower8-fusion -mno-mpower8-fusion -mpower8-vector -mno-power8-vector @gol
-mcrypto -mno-crypto -mdirect-move -mno-direct-move @gol
-mquad-memory -mno-quad-memory @gol
-mquad-memory-atomic -mno-quad-memory-atomic @gol
-mcompat-align-parm -mno-compat-align-parm @gol
-mupper-regs-df -mno-upper-regs-df -mupper-regs-sf -mno-upper-regs-sf @gol
-mupper-regs -mno-upper-regs}

@emph{S/390 and zSeries Options}
@gccoptlist{-mtune=@var{cpu-type}  -march=@var{cpu-type} @gol
-mhard-float  -msoft-float  -mhard-dfp -mno-hard-dfp @gol
-mlong-double-64 -mlong-double-128 @gol
-mbackchain  -mno-backchain -mpacked-stack  -mno-packed-stack @gol
-msmall-exec  -mno-small-exec  -mmvcle -mno-mvcle @gol
-m64  -m31  -mdebug  -mno-debug  -mesa  -mzarch @gol
-mtpf-trace -mno-tpf-trace  -mfused-madd  -mno-fused-madd @gol
-mwarn-framesize  -mwarn-dynamicstack  -mstack-size -mstack-guard @gol
-mhotpatch=@var{halfwords},@var{halfwords}}

@emph{Solaris 2 Options}
@gccoptlist{-mclear-hwcap -mno-clear-hwcap -mimpure-text  -mno-impure-text @gol
-pthreads -pthread}

@emph{SPARC Options}
@gccoptlist{-mcpu=@var{cpu-type} @gol
-mtune=@var{cpu-type} @gol
-mcmodel=@var{code-model} @gol
-mmemory-model=@var{mem-model} @gol
-m32  -m64  -mapp-regs  -mno-app-regs @gol
-mfaster-structs  -mno-faster-structs  -mflat  -mno-flat @gol
-mfpu  -mno-fpu  -mhard-float  -msoft-float @gol
-mhard-quad-float  -msoft-quad-float @gol
-mstack-bias  -mno-stack-bias @gol
-munaligned-doubles  -mno-unaligned-doubles @gol
-muser-mode  -mno-user-mode @gol
-mv8plus  -mno-v8plus  -mvis  -mno-vis @gol
-mvis2  -mno-vis2  -mvis3  -mno-vis3 @gol
-mcbcond -mno-cbcond @gol
-mfmaf  -mno-fmaf  -mpopc  -mno-popc @gol
-mfix-at697f -mfix-ut699}

@emph{System V Options}
@gccoptlist{-Qy  -Qn  -YP,@var{paths}  -Ym,@var{dir}}

@emph{VMS Options}
@gccoptlist{-mvms-return-codes -mdebug-main=@var{prefix} -mmalloc64 @gol
-mpointer-size=@var{size}}

@emph{VxWorks Options}
@gccoptlist{-mrtp  -non-static  -Bstatic  -Bdynamic @gol
-Xbind-lazy  -Xbind-now}

@emph{x86 Options}
@gccoptlist{-mtune=@var{cpu-type}  -march=@var{cpu-type} @gol
-mtune-ctrl=@var{feature-list} -mdump-tune-features -mno-default @gol
-mfpmath=@var{unit} @gol
-masm=@var{dialect}  -mno-fancy-math-387 @gol
-mno-fp-ret-in-387  -msoft-float @gol
-mno-wide-multiply  -mrtd  -malign-double @gol
-mpreferred-stack-boundary=@var{num} @gol
-mincoming-stack-boundary=@var{num} @gol
-mcld -mcx16 -msahf -mmovbe -mcrc32 @gol
-mrecip -mrecip=@var{opt} @gol
-mvzeroupper -mprefer-avx128 @gol
-mmmx  -msse  -msse2 -msse3 -mssse3 -msse4.1 -msse4.2 -msse4 -mavx @gol
-mavx2 -mavx512f -mavx512pf -mavx512er -mavx512cd -msha @gol
-maes -mpclmul -mfsgsbase -mrdrnd -mf16c -mfma -mprefetchwt1 @gol
-mclflushopt -mxsavec -mxsaves @gol
-msse4a -m3dnow -mpopcnt -mabm -mbmi -mtbm -mfma4 -mxop -mlzcnt @gol
-mbmi2 -mfxsr -mxsave -mxsaveopt -mrtm -mlwp -mmpx -mthreads @gol
-mno-align-stringops  -minline-all-stringops @gol
-minline-stringops-dynamically -mstringop-strategy=@var{alg} @gol
-mmemcpy-strategy=@var{strategy} -mmemset-strategy=@var{strategy} @gol
-mpush-args  -maccumulate-outgoing-args  -m128bit-long-double @gol
-m96bit-long-double -mlong-double-64 -mlong-double-80 -mlong-double-128 @gol
-mregparm=@var{num}  -msseregparm @gol
-mveclibabi=@var{type} -mvect8-ret-in-mem @gol
-mpc32 -mpc64 -mpc80 -mstackrealign @gol
-momit-leaf-frame-pointer  -mno-red-zone -mno-tls-direct-seg-refs @gol
-mcmodel=@var{code-model} -mabi=@var{name} -maddress-mode=@var{mode} @gol
-m32 -m64 -mx32 -m16 -mlarge-data-threshold=@var{num} @gol
-msse2avx -mfentry -mrecord-mcount -mnop-mcount -m8bit-idiv @gol
-mavx256-split-unaligned-load -mavx256-split-unaligned-store @gol
-malign-data=@var{type} -mstack-protector-guard=@var{guard}}

@emph{x86 Windows Options}
@gccoptlist{-mconsole -mcygwin -mno-cygwin -mdll @gol
-mnop-fun-dllimport -mthread @gol
-municode -mwin32 -mwindows -fno-set-stack-executable}

@emph{XCore Options}
There are no options specific to the XMOS XCore architecture.

@emph{zSeries Options}
See S/390 and zSeries Options.

@item Code Generation Options
@xref{Code Gen Options,,Options for Code Generation Conventions}.
@gccoptlist{-fcall-saved-@var{reg}  -fcall-used-@var{reg} @gol
-ffixed-@var{reg}  -fexceptions @gol
-fnon-call-exceptions  -fdelete-dead-exceptions  -funwind-tables @gol
-fasynchronous-unwind-tables @gol
-fno-gnu-unique @gol
-finhibit-size-directive  -finstrument-functions @gol
-finstrument-functions-exclude-function-list=@var{sym},@var{sym},@dots{} @gol
-finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list=@var{file},@var{file},@dots{} @gol
-fno-common  -fno-ident @gol
-fpcc-struct-return  -fpic  -fPIC -fpie -fPIE @gol
-fno-jump-tables @gol
-frecord-gcc-switches @gol
-freg-struct-return  -fshort-enums @gol
-fshort-double  -fshort-wchar @gol
-fverbose-asm  -fpack-struct[=@var{n}]  -fstack-check @gol
-fstack-limit-register=@var{reg}  -fstack-limit-symbol=@var{sym} @gol
-fno-stack-limit -fsplit-stack @gol
-fleading-underscore  -ftls-model=@var{model} @gol
-fstack-reuse=@var{reuse_level} @gol
-ftrapv  -fwrapv  -fbounds-check @gol
-fvisibility=@r{[}default@r{|}internal@r{|}hidden@r{|}protected@r{]} @gol
-fstrict-volatile-bitfields -fsync-libcalls}
@end table


@node Overall Options
@section Options Controlling the Kind of Output

Compilation can involve up to four stages: preprocessing, compilation
proper, assembly and linking, always in that order.  Clang/LLVM is capable of
preprocessing and compiling several files either into several
assembler input files, or into one assembler input file; then each
assembler input file produces an object file, and linking combines all
the object files (those newly compiled, and those specified as input)
into an executable file.

@emph{Note:} Unlike GCC, Clang/LLVM has an integrated assembler; there
is no separate standalone assembler program.

The following GCC options are not supported by Clang/LLVM:
@gccoptlist{--help=@{@var{class}@r{|[}^@r{]}@var{qualifier}@}@r{[},@dots{}@r{]} @gol
-wrapper, -fplugin=@var{name}.so -fplugin-arg-@var{name}-@var{key}=@var{value} @gol
-fdump-ada-spec@r{[}-slim@r{]} -fada-spec-parent=@var{unit} -fdump-go-spec=@var{file}}

The following GCC options are accepted by Clang/LLVM, but do nothing, and by
default will issue a warning message:
@gccoptlist{--target-help --pass-exit-codes}

The following options behave differently under Clang/LLVM compared to GCC.
@gccoptlist{--no-canonical-prefixes}

@cindex file name suffix
For any given input file, the file name suffix determines what kind of
compilation is done:

@table @gcctabopt
@item @var{file}.c
C source code that must be preprocessed.

@item @var{file}.i
C source code that should not be preprocessed.

@item @var{file}.ii
C++ source code that should not be preprocessed.

@item @var{file}.m
Objective-C source code.  Note that you must link with the @file{libobjc}
library to make an Objective-C program work.

@item @var{file}.mi
Objective-C source code that should not be preprocessed.

@item @var{file}.mm
@itemx @var{file}.M
Objective-C++ source code.  Note that you must link with the @file{libobjc}
library to make an Objective-C++ program work.  Note that @samp{.M} refers
to a literal capital M@.

@item @var{file}.mii
Objective-C++ source code that should not be preprocessed.

@item @var{file}.h
C, C++, Objective-C or Objective-C++ header file to be turned into a
precompiled header (default), or C, C++ header file to be turned into an
Ada spec (via the @option{-fdump-ada-spec} switch).

@item @var{file}.cc
@itemx @var{file}.cp
@itemx @var{file}.cxx
@itemx @var{file}.cpp
@itemx @var{file}.CPP
@itemx @var{file}.c++
@itemx @var{file}.C
C++ source code that must be preprocessed.  Note that in @samp{.cxx},
the last two letters must both be literally @samp{x}.  Likewise,
@samp{.C} refers to a literal capital C@.

@item @var{file}.mm
@itemx @var{file}.M
Objective-C++ source code that must be preprocessed.

@item @var{file}.mii
Objective-C++ source code that should not be preprocessed.

@item @var{file}.hh
@itemx @var{file}.H
@itemx @var{file}.hp
@itemx @var{file}.hxx
@itemx @var{file}.hpp
@itemx @var{file}.HPP
@itemx @var{file}.h++
@itemx @var{file}.tcc
C++ header file to be turned into a precompiled header.

@c Unlike GCC, LLVM does not know about some suffixes for languages
@c not yet included:
@c Pascal:
@c @var{file}.p
@c @var{file}.pas
@c Ratfor:
@c @var{file}.r

@item @var{file}.s
Assembler code.

@item @var{file}.S
@itemx @var{file}.sx
Assembler code that must be preprocessed.

@item @var{other}
An object file to be fed straight into linking.
Any file name with no recognized suffix is treated this way.
@end table

@opindex x
You can specify the input language explicitly with the @option{-x} option:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -x @var{language}
Specify explicitly the @var{language} for the following input files
(rather than letting the compiler choose a default based on the file
name suffix).  This option applies to all following input files until
the next @option{-x} option.  Possible values for @var{language} are:
@smallexample
c  c-header  cpp-output
c++  c++-header  c++-cpp-output
objective-c  objective-c-header  objective-c-cpp-output
objective-c++ objective-c++-header objective-c++-cpp-output
assembler  assembler-with-cpp
@end smallexample

@item -x none
Turn off any specification of a language, so that subsequent files are
handled according to their file name suffixes (as they are if @option{-x}
has not been used at all).

@item -pass-exit-codes
@opindex pass-exit-codes
This option is accepted by Clang/LLVM for compatibility with GCC, but
will do nothing, and by default issues a warning message.
@end table

If you only want some of the stages of compilation, you can use
@option{-x} (or filename suffixes) to tell @command{clang} where to start, and
one of the options @option{-c}, @option{-S}, or @option{-E} to say where
@command{clang} is to stop.  Note that some combinations (for example,
@samp{-x cpp-output -E}) instruct @command{clang} to do nothing at all.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -c
@opindex c
Compile or assemble the source files, but do not link.  The linking
stage simply is not done.  The ultimate output is in the form of an
object file for each source file.

By default, the object file name for a source file is made by replacing
the suffix @samp{.c}, @samp{.i}, @samp{.s}, etc., with @samp{.o}.

Unrecognized input files, not requiring compilation or assembly, are
ignored.

@item -S
@opindex S
Stop after the stage of compilation proper; do not assemble.  The output
is in the form of an assembler code file for each non-assembler input
file specified.

By default, the assembler file name for a source file is made by
replacing the suffix @samp{.c}, @samp{.i}, etc., with @samp{.s}.

Input files that don't require compilation are ignored.

@item -E
@opindex E
Stop after the preprocessing stage; do not run the compiler proper.  The
output is in the form of preprocessed source code, which is sent to the
standard output.

Input files that don't require preprocessing are ignored.

@cindex output file option
@item -o @var{file}
@opindex o
Place output in file @var{file}.  This applies to whatever
sort of output is being produced, whether it be an executable file,
an object file, an assembler file or preprocessed C code.

If @option{-o} is not specified, the default is to put an executable
file in @file{a.out}, the object file for
@file{@var{source}.@var{suffix}} in @file{@var{source}.o}, its
assembler file in @file{@var{source}.s}, a precompiled header file in
@file{@var{source}.@var{suffix}.gch}, and all preprocessed C source on
standard output.

@item -v
@opindex v
Print (on standard error output) the commands executed to run the stages
of compilation.  Also print the version number of the compiler driver
program and of the preprocessor and the compiler proper.

@item -###
@opindex ###
Like @option{-v} except the commands are not executed and arguments
are quoted unless they contain only alphanumeric characters or @code{./-_}.
This is useful for shell scripts to capture the driver-generated command lines.

@item -pipe
@opindex pipe
Use pipes rather than temporary files for communication between the
various stages of compilation.  @emph{Note:} Unlike GCC, LLVM does not
have a separate assembler, so problems communicating with a separate
assembler do not arise.

@item --help
@opindex help
Print (on the standard output) a description of the command-line options
understood by @command{clang}.  If the @option{-v} option is also specified
then @option{--help} is also passed on to the various processes
invoked by @command{clang}, so that they can display the command-line options
they accept.  If the @option{-Wextra} option has also been specified
(prior to the @option{--help} option), then command-line options that
have no documentation associated with them are also displayed.

@item --target-help
@opindex target-help
This option is accepted by Clang/LLVM for compatibility with GCC, but
will do nothing, and by default issues a warning message.

@item -no-canonical-prefixes
@opindex no-canonical-prefixes
Do not expand any symbolic links, resolve references to @samp{/../}
or @samp{/./}, or make the path absolute when generating a relative
prefix.

@emph{Note:} This behaves slightly differently with Clang/LLVM
compared to GCC.  The absence of paths even applies to the
@command{clang} command itself, when it is reinvoked by the driver.
So the command must be a fully qualified filename.

@item --version
@opindex version
Display the version number and copyrights of the invoked LLVM@.

@item @@@var{file}
Read command-line options from @var{file}.  The options read are
inserted in place of the original @@@var{file} option.  If @var{file}
does not exist, or cannot be read, then the option will be treated
literally, and not removed.

Options in @var{file} are separated by whitespace.  A whitespace
character may be included in an option by surrounding the entire
option in either single or double quotes.  Any character (including a
backslash) may be included by prefixing the character to be included
with a backslash.  The @var{file} may itself contain additional
@@@var{file} options; any such options will be processed recursively.
@end table

@node Invoking Clang/LLVM for C++
@section Compiling C++ Programs

@cindex suffixes for C++ source
@cindex C++ source file suffixes
C++ source files conventionally use one of the suffixes @samp{.C},
@samp{.cc}, @samp{.cpp}, @samp{.CPP}, @samp{.c++}, @samp{.cp}, or
@samp{.cxx}; C++ header files often use @samp{.hh}, @samp{.hpp},
@samp{.H}, or (for shared template code) @samp{.tcc}; and preprocessed
C++ files use the suffix @samp{.ii}.  Clang/LLVM recognizes files with
these names and compiles them as C++ programs even if you call the
compiler the same way as for compiling C programs.

@findex clang++
However, the use of @command{clang} does not add the C++ library.
@command{clang++} is a program that automatically
specifies linking against the C++ library.  It treats @samp{.c},
@samp{.h} and @samp{.i} files as C++ source files instead of C source
files unless @option{-x} is used.  This program is also useful when
precompiling a C header file with a @samp{.h} extension for use in C++
compilations.

@cindex invoking @command{clang++}
When you compile C++ programs, you may specify many of the same
command-line options that you use for compiling programs in any
language; or command-line options meaningful for C and related
languages; or options that are meaningful only for C++ programs.
@xref{C Dialect Options,,Options Controlling C Dialect}, for
explanations of options for languages related to C@.
@xref{C++ Dialect Options,,Options Controlling C++ Dialect}, for
explanations of options that are meaningful only for C++ programs.

@node C Dialect Options
@section Options Controlling C Dialect
@cindex dialect options
@cindex language dialect options
@cindex options, dialect

The following GCC options are not supported by Clang/LLVM:
@gccoptlist{-fallow-parameterless-variadic-functions  -fopenacc @gol
-fopenmp-simd  -fcilkplus  -fgnu-tm  -fplan9-extensions  -traditional @gol
-traditional-cpp  -fcond-mismatch  -funsigned-bitfields @gol
-fno-signed-bitfields  -fno-unsigned-bitfields}

The following options behave differently under Clang/LLVM compared to GCC.
@gccoptlist{-aux-info @var{filename}}

The following options control the dialect of C (or languages derived
from C, such as C++, Objective-C and Objective-C++) that the compiler
accepts:

@table @gcctabopt
@cindex ANSI support
@cindex ISO support
@item -ansi
@opindex ansi
In C mode, this is equivalent to @option{-std=c90}. In C++ mode, it is
equivalent to @option{-std=c++98}.

This turns off certain features of Clang/LLVM that are incompatible with ISO
C90 (when compiling C code), or of standard C++ (when compiling C++ code),
such as the @code{asm} and @code{typeof} keywords, and
predefined macros such as @code{unix} and @code{vax} that identify the
type of system you are using.  It also enables the undesirable and
rarely used ISO trigraph feature.  For the C compiler,
it disables recognition of C++ style @samp{//} comments as well as
the @code{inline} keyword.

The alternate keywords @code{__asm__}, @code{__extension__},
@code{__inline__} and @code{__typeof__} continue to work despite
@option{-ansi}.  You would not want to use them in an ISO C program, of
course, but it is useful to put them in header files that might be included
in compilations done with @option{-ansi}.  Alternate predefined macros
such as @code{__unix__} and @code{__vax__} are also available, with or
without @option{-ansi}.

The @option{-ansi} option does not cause non-ISO programs to be
rejected gratuitously.  For that, @option{-Wpedantic} is required in
addition to @option{-ansi}.  @xref{Warning Options}.

The macro @code{__STRICT_ANSI__} is predefined when the @option{-ansi}
option is used.  Some header files may notice this macro and refrain
from declaring certain functions or defining certain macros that the
ISO standard doesn't call for; this is to avoid interfering with any
programs that might use these names for other things.

Functions that are normally built in but do not have semantics
defined by ISO C (such as @code{alloca} and @code{ffs}) are not built-in
functions when @option{-ansi} is used.  @xref{Other Builtins,,Other
built-in functions provided by LLVM}, for details of the functions
affected.

@item -std=
@opindex std
Determine the language standard. @xref{Standards,,Language Standards
Supported by LLVM}, for details of these standard versions.  This option
is currently only supported when compiling C or C++.

The compiler can accept several base standards, such as @samp{c90} or
@samp{c++98}, and GNU dialects of those standards, such as
@samp{gnu90} or @samp{gnu++98}.  When a base standard is specified, the
compiler accepts all programs following that standard plus those
using GNU extensions that do not contradict it.  For example,
@option{-std=c90} turns off certain features of LLVM that are
incompatible with ISO C90, such as the @code{asm} and @code{typeof}
keywords, but not other GNU extensions that do not have a meaning in
ISO C90, such as omitting the middle term of a @code{?:}
expression. On the other hand, when a GNU dialect of a standard is
specified, all features supported by the compiler are enabled, even when
those features change the meaning of the base standard.  As a result, some
strict-conforming programs may be rejected.  The particular standard
is used by @option{-Wpedantic} to identify which features are GNU
extensions given that version of the standard. For example
@option{-std=gnu90 -Wpedantic} warns about C++ style @samp{//}
comments, while @option{-std=gnu99 -Wpedantic} does not.

A value for this option must be provided; possible values are

@table @samp
@item c90
@itemx c89
@itemx iso9899:1990
Support all ISO C90 programs (certain GNU extensions that conflict
with ISO C90 are disabled). Same as @option{-ansi} for C code.

@item iso9899:199409
ISO C90 as modified in amendment 1.

@item c99
@itemx c9x
@itemx iso9899:1999
@itemx iso9899:199x
ISO C99.  This standard is substantially completely supported, modulo
bugs and floating-point issues
(mainly but not entirely relating to optional C99 features from
Annexes F and G).  See
@w{@uref{http://gcc.gnu.org/c99status.html}} for more information.  The
names @samp{c9x} and @samp{iso9899:199x} are deprecated.

@item c11
@itemx c1x
@itemx iso9899:2011
ISO C11, the 2011 revision of the ISO C standard.  This standard is
substantially completely supported, modulo bugs, floating-point issues
(mainly but not entirely relating to optional C11 features from
Annexes F and G) and the optional Annexes K (Bounds-checking
interfaces) and L (Analyzability).  The name @samp{c1x} is deprecated.

@item gnu90
@itemx gnu89
GNU dialect of ISO C90 (including some C99 features).

@item gnu99
@itemx gnu9x
GNU dialect of ISO C99.  The name @samp{gnu9x} is deprecated.

@item gnu11
@itemx gnu1x
GNU dialect of ISO C11.  This is the default for C code.
The name @samp{gnu1x} is deprecated.

@item c++98
@itemx c++03
The 1998 ISO C++ standard plus the 2003 technical corrigendum and some
additional defect reports. Same as @option{-ansi} for C++ code.

@item gnu++98
@itemx gnu++03
GNU dialect of @option{-std=c++98}.  This is the default for
C++ code.

@item c++11
@itemx c++0x
The 2011 ISO C++ standard plus amendments.
The name @samp{c++0x} is deprecated.

@item gnu++11
@itemx gnu++0x
GNU dialect of @option{-std=c++11}.
The name @samp{gnu++0x} is deprecated.

@item c++14
@itemx c++1y
The 2014 ISO C++ standard plus amendments.
The name @samp{c++1y} is deprecated.

@item gnu++14
@itemx gnu++1y
GNU dialect of @option{-std=c++14}.
The name @samp{gnu++1y} is deprecated.

@item c++1z
The next revision of the ISO C++ standard, tentatively planned for
2017.  Support is highly experimental, and will almost certainly
change in incompatible ways in future releases.

@item gnu++1z
GNU dialect of @option{-std=c++1z}.  Support is highly experimental,
and will almost certainly change in incompatible ways in future
releases.
@end table

@item -fgnu89-inline
@opindex fgnu89-inline
The option @option{-fgnu89-inline} tells LLVM to use the traditional
GNU semantics for @code{inline} functions when in C99 mode.
@xref{Inline,,An Inline Function is As Fast As a Macro}.
Using this option is roughly equivalent to adding the
@code{gnu_inline} function attribute to all inline functions
(@pxref{Function Attributes}).

The option @option{-fno-gnu89-inline} explicitly tells LLVM to use the
C99 semantics for @code{inline} when in C99 or gnu99 mode (i.e., it
specifies the default behavior).
This option is not supported in @option{-std=c90} or
@option{-std=gnu90} mode.

The preprocessor macros @code{__GNUC_GNU_INLINE__} and
@code{__GNUC_STDC_INLINE__} may be used to check which semantics are
in effect for @code{inline} functions.  @xref{Common Predefined
Macros,,,cpp,The C Preprocessor}.

@item -aux-info @var{filename}
@opindex aux-info
Clang/LLVM intends this to be an option provided for compatibility
with GCC, but which does nothing.  However the implementation fails to
recognize the following @var{filename} argument which will be treated
as another source file on the command line, usually causing an error.

@emph{Note:} Unlike GCC, this option is silently ignored in any
language other than C@.

@item -fno-asm
@opindex fno-asm
Do not recognize @code{asm}, @code{inline} or @code{typeof} as a
keyword, so that code can use these words as identifiers.  You can use
the keywords @code{__asm__}, @code{__inline__} and @code{__typeof__}
instead.  @option{-ansi} implies @option{-fno-asm}.

In C++, this switch only affects the @code{typeof} keyword, since
@code{asm} and @code{inline} are standard keywords.  You may want to
use the @option{-fno-gnu-keywords} flag instead, which has the same
effect.  In C99 mode (@option{-std=c99} or @option{-std=gnu99}), this
switch only affects the @code{asm} and @code{typeof} keywords, since
@code{inline} is a standard keyword in ISO C99.

@item -fno-builtin
@itemx -fno-builtin-@var{function}
@opindex fno-builtin
@cindex built-in functions
Don't recognize built-in functions that do not begin with
@samp{__builtin_} as prefix.  @xref{Other Builtins,,Other built-in
functions provided by LLVM}, for details of the functions affected,
including those which are not built-in functions when @option{-ansi} or
@option{-std} options for strict ISO C conformance are used because they
do not have an ISO standard meaning.

Clang/LLVM normally generates special code to handle certain built-in functions
more efficiently; for instance, calls to @code{alloca} may become single
instructions which adjust the stack directly, and calls to @code{memcpy}
may become inline copy loops.  The resulting code is often both smaller
and faster, but since the function calls no longer appear as such, you
cannot set a breakpoint on those calls, nor can you change the behavior
of the functions by linking with a different library.  In addition,
when a function is recognized as a built-in function, LLVM may use
information about that function to warn about problems with calls to
that function, or to generate more efficient code, even if the
resulting code still contains calls to that function.  For example,
warnings are given with @option{-Wformat} for bad calls to
@code{printf} when @code{printf} is built in and @code{strlen} is
known not to modify global memory.

With the @option{-fno-builtin-@var{function}} option
only the built-in function @var{function} is
disabled.  @var{function} must not begin with @samp{__builtin_}.  If a
function is named that is not built-in in this version of Clang/LLVM, this
option is ignored.  There is no corresponding
@option{-fbuiltin-@var{function}} option; if you wish to enable
built-in functions selectively when using @option{-fno-builtin} or
@option{-ffreestanding}, you may define macros such as:

@smallexample
#define abs(n)          __builtin_abs ((n))
#define strcpy(d, s)    __builtin_strcpy ((d), (s))
@end smallexample

@item -fhosted
@opindex fhosted
@cindex hosted environment

Assert that compilation targets a hosted environment.  This implies
@option{-fbuiltin}.  A hosted environment is one in which the
entire standard library is available, and in which @code{main} has a return
type of @code{int}.  Examples are nearly everything except a kernel.
This is equivalent to @option{-fno-freestanding}.

@item -ffreestanding
@opindex ffreestanding
@cindex hosted environment

Assert that compilation targets a freestanding environment.  This
implies @option{-fno-builtin}.  A freestanding environment
is one in which the standard library may not exist, and program startup may
not necessarily be at @code{main}.  The most obvious example is an OS kernel.
This is equivalent to @option{-fno-hosted}.

@xref{Standards,,Language Standards Supported by LLVM}, for details of
freestanding and hosted environments.

@item -fopenmp
@opindex fopenmp
@cindex OpenMP parallel
Enable handling of OpenMP directives @code{#pragma omp} in C/C++ and
@code{!$omp} in Fortran.  When @option{-fopenmp} is specified, the
compiler generates parallel code according to the OpenMP Application
Program Interface v4.0 @w{@uref{http://www.openmp.org/}}.  This option
implies @option{-pthread}, and thus is only supported on targets that
have support for @option{-pthread}. @option{-fopenmp} implies
@option{-fopenmp-simd}.

@item -fms-extensions
@opindex fms-extensions
Accept some non-standard constructs used in Microsoft header files.

In C++ code, this allows member names in structures to be similar
to previous types declarations.

@smallexample
typedef int UOW;
struct ABC @{
  UOW UOW;
@};
@end smallexample

Some cases of unnamed fields in structures and unions are only
accepted with this option.  @xref{Unnamed Fields,,Unnamed struct/union
fields within structs/unions}, for details.

Note that this option is off for all targets but x86
targets using ms-abi.

@item -trigraphs
@opindex trigraphs
Support ISO C trigraphs.  The @option{-ansi} option (and @option{-std}
options for strict ISO C conformance) implies @option{-trigraphs}.

@item -fcond-mismatch
@opindex fcond-mismatch
Allow conditional expressions with mismatched types in the second and
third arguments.  The value of such an expression is void.  This option
is not supported for C++.

@item -flax-vector-conversions
@opindex flax-vector-conversions
Allow implicit conversions between vectors with differing numbers of
elements and/or incompatible element types.  This option should not be
used for new code.

@item -funsigned-char
@opindex funsigned-char
Let the type @code{char} be unsigned, like @code{unsigned char}.

Each kind of machine has a default for what @code{char} should
be.  It is either like @code{unsigned char} by default or like
@code{signed char} by default.

Ideally, a portable program should always use @code{signed char} or
@code{unsigned char} when it depends on the signedness of an object.
But many programs have been written to use plain @code{char} and
expect it to be signed, or expect it to be unsigned, depending on the
machines they were written for.  This option, and its inverse, let you
make such a program work with the opposite default.

The type @code{char} is always a distinct type from each of
@code{signed char} or @code{unsigned char}, even though its behavior
is always just like one of those two.

@item -fsigned-char
@opindex fsigned-char
Let the type @code{char} be signed, like @code{signed char}.

Note that this is equivalent to @option{-fno-unsigned-char}, which is
the negative form of @option{-funsigned-char}.  Likewise, the option
@option{-fno-signed-char} is equivalent to @option{-funsigned-char}.

@item -fsigned-bitfields
@opindex fsigned-bitfields
This option controls whether a bit-field is signed or unsigned, when the
declaration does not use either @code{signed} or @code{unsigned}.  By
default, such a bit-field is signed, because this is consistent: the
basic integer types such as @code{int} are signed types.  Thus this
option reinforces the default behavior

@emph{Note:} GCC provides a wider range of options to force unsigned
behavior and prevent either signed or unsigned behavior, but these are
not available in LLVM.
@end table

@node C++ Dialect Options
@section Options Controlling C++ Dialect

@cindex compiler options, C++
@cindex C++ options, command-line
@cindex options, C++
This section describes the command-line options that are only meaningful
for C++ programs.  You can also use most of the Clang/LLVM compiler options
regardless of what language your program is in.  For example, you
might compile a file @file{firstClass.C} like this:

@smallexample
clang++ -g -frepo -O -c firstClass.C
@end smallexample

@noindent
In this example, only @option{-frepo} is an option meant
only for C++ programs; you can use the other options with any
language supported by LLVM@.

The following GCC options for C++ programs are not supported by
Clang/LLVM:
@gccoptlist{-fabi-version=@var{n}  -fabi-compat-version=@var{n}  -fcheck-new  @gol
-fdeduce-init-list  -ffriend-injection  -fno-enforce-eh-specs @gol
-fextern-tls-init  -fno-extern-tls-init  -fno-implicit-inline-templates @gol
-fno-implement-inlines  -fno-nonansi-builtins  -fnothrow-opt @gol
-fno-optional-diags  -fno-pretty-templates  -frepo  -fsized-deallocation @gol
-fstats  -fno-use-cxa-get-exception-ptr  -fvtable-verify=@r{[}std@r{|}preinit@r{|}none@r{]} @gol
-fvtv-debug  -fvtv-counts  -fno-weak}

Here is a list of options that are @emph{only} for compiling C++ programs:

@table @gcctabopt

@item -fno-access-control
@opindex fno-access-control
Turn off all access checking.  This switch is mainly useful for working
around bugs in the access control code.

@item -fconstexpr-depth=@var{n}
@opindex fconstexpr-depth
Set the maximum nested evaluation depth for C++11 constexpr functions
to @var{n}.  A limit is needed to detect endless recursion during
constant expression evaluation.  The minimum specified by the standard
is 512.

@item -fno-elide-constructors
@opindex fno-elide-constructors
The C++ standard allows an implementation to omit creating a temporary
that is only used to initialize another object of the same type.
Specifying this option disables that optimization, and forces G++ to
call the copy constructor in all cases.

@item -ffor-scope
@itemx -fno-for-scope
@opindex ffor-scope
@opindex fno-for-scope
If @option{-ffor-scope} is specified, the scope of variables declared in
a @i{for-init-statement} is limited to the @code{for} loop itself,
as specified by the C++ standard.
If @option{-fno-for-scope} is specified, the scope of variables declared in
a @i{for-init-statement} extends to the end of the enclosing scope,
as was the case in old versions of G++, and other (traditional)
implementations of C++.

If neither flag is given, the default is to follow the standard,
but to allow and give a warning for old-style code that would
otherwise be invalid, or have different behavior.

@item -fno-gnu-keywords
@opindex fno-gnu-keywords
Do not recognize @code{typeof} as a keyword, so that code can use this
word as an identifier.  You can use the keyword @code{__typeof__} instead.
@option{-ansi} implies @option{-fno-gnu-keywords}.

@item -fno-implicit-templates
@opindex fno-implicit-templates
Never emit code for non-inline templates that are instantiated
implicitly (i.e.@: by use); only emit code for explicit instantiations.
@xref{Template Instantiation}, for more information.

@item -fms-extensions
@opindex fms-extensions
Disable Wpedantic warnings about constructs used in MFC, such as implicit
int and getting a pointer to member function via non-standard syntax.

@item -fno-operator-names
@opindex fno-operator-names
Do not treat the operator name keywords @code{and}, @code{bitand},
@code{bitor}, @code{compl}, @code{not}, @code{or} and @code{xor} as
synonyms as keywords.

@item -fpermissive
@opindex fpermissive
Downgrade some diagnostics about nonconformant code from errors to
warnings.  Thus, using @option{-fpermissive} allows some
nonconforming code to compile.

@item -fno-rtti
@opindex fno-rtti
Disable generation of information about every class with virtual
functions for use by the C++ run-time type identification features
(@code{dynamic_cast} and @code{typeid}).  If you don't use those parts
of the language, you can save some space by using this flag.  Note that
exception handling uses the same information, but G++ generates it as
needed. The @code{dynamic_cast} operator can still be used for casts that
do not require run-time type information, i.e.@: casts to @code{void *} or to
unambiguous base classes.

@item -fstrict-enums
@opindex fstrict-enums
Allow the compiler to optimize using the assumption that a value of
enumerated type can only be one of the values of the enumeration (as
defined in the C++ standard; basically, a value that can be
represented in the minimum number of bits needed to represent all the
enumerators).  This assumption may not be valid if the program uses a
cast to convert an arbitrary integer value to the enumerated type.

@item -ftemplate-backtrace-limit=@var{n}
@opindex ftemplate-backtrace-limit
Set the maximum number of template instantiation notes for a single
warning or error to @var{n}.  The default value is 10.

@item -ftemplate-depth=@var{n}
@opindex ftemplate-depth
Set the maximum instantiation depth for template classes to @var{n}.
A limit on the template instantiation depth is needed to detect
endless recursions during template class instantiation.  ANSI/ISO C++
conforming programs must not rely on a maximum depth greater than 17
(changed to 1024 in C++11).  The default value is 900, as the compiler
can run out of stack space before hitting 1024 in some situations.

@item -fno-threadsafe-statics
@opindex fno-threadsafe-statics
Do not emit the extra code to use the routines specified in the C++
ABI for thread-safe initialization of local statics.  You can use this
option to reduce code size slightly in code that doesn't need to be
thread-safe.

@item -fuse-cxa-atexit
@opindex fuse-cxa-atexit
Register destructors for objects with static storage duration with the
@code{__cxa_atexit} function rather than the @code{atexit} function.
This option is required for fully standards-compliant handling of static
destructors, but only works if your C library supports
@code{__cxa_atexit}.

@item -fvisibility-inlines-hidden
@opindex fvisibility-inlines-hidden
This switch declares that the user does not attempt to compare
pointers to inline functions or methods where the addresses of the two functions
are taken in different shared objects.

The effect of this is that Clang/LLVM may, effectively, mark inline methods with
@code{__attribute__ ((visibility ("hidden")))} so that they do not
appear in the export table of a DSO and do not require a PLT indirection
when used within the DSO@.  Enabling this option can have a dramatic effect
on load and link times of a DSO as it massively reduces the size of the
dynamic export table when the library makes heavy use of templates.

The behavior of this switch is not quite the same as marking the
methods as hidden directly, because it does not affect static variables
local to the function or cause the compiler to deduce that
the function is defined in only one shared object.

You may mark a method as having a visibility explicitly to negate the
effect of the switch for that method.  For example, if you do want to
compare pointers to a particular inline method, you might mark it as
having default visibility.  Marking the enclosing class with explicit
visibility has no effect.

Explicitly instantiated inline methods are unaffected by this option
as their linkage might otherwise cross a shared library boundary.
@xref{Template Instantiation}.

@item -fvisibility-ms-compat
@opindex fvisibility-ms-compat
This flag attempts to use visibility settings to make LLVM's C++
linkage model compatible with that of Microsoft Visual Studio.

The flag makes these changes to LLVM's linkage model:

@enumerate
@item
It sets the default visibility to @code{hidden}, like
@option{-fvisibility=hidden}.

@item
Types, but not their members, are not hidden by default.

@item
The One Definition Rule is relaxed for types without explicit
visibility specifications that are defined in more than one
shared object: those declarations are permitted if they are
permitted when this option is not used.
@end enumerate

In new code it is better to use @option{-fvisibility=hidden} and
export those classes that are intended to be externally visible.
Unfortunately it is possible for code to rely, perhaps accidentally,
on the Visual Studio behavior.

Among the consequences of these changes are that static data members
of the same type with the same name but defined in different shared
objects are different, so changing one does not change the other;
and that pointers to function members defined in different shared
objects may not compare equal.  When this flag is given, it is a
violation of the ODR to define types with the same name differently.

@item -fext-numeric-literals @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex fext-numeric-literals
@opindex fno-ext-numeric-literals
Accept imaginary, fixed-point, or machine-defined
literal number suffixes as GNU extensions.
When this option is turned off these suffixes are treated
as C++11 user-defined literal numeric suffixes.
This is on by default for all pre-C++11 dialects and all GNU dialects:
@option{-std=c++98}, @option{-std=gnu++98}, @option{-std=gnu++11},
@option{-std=gnu++14}.
This option is off by default
for ISO C++11 onwards (@option{-std=c++11}, ...).

@item -fno-weak
@opindex fno-weak
Do not use weak symbol support, even if it is provided by the linker.
By default, G++ uses weak symbols if they are available.  This
option exists only for testing, and should not be used by end-users;
it results in inferior code and has no benefits.  This option may
be removed in a future release of G++.

@item -nostdinc++
@xref{op nostdinc++,, -nostdinc++}.
@end table

In addition, these optimization, warning, and code generation options
have meanings only for C++ programs:

The following GCC options for optimization, warning, and code
generation of C++ programs are not supported by Clang/LLVM:
@gccoptlist{-Wabi=@var{n}  -Wliteral-suffix  -Wstrict-null-sentinel @gol
-Wno-non-template-friend  -Wno-pmf-conversions}

@table @gcctabopt
@item -Wctor-dtor-privacy @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wctor-dtor-privacy
@opindex Wno-ctor-dtor-privacy
Warn when a class seems unusable because all the constructors or
destructors in that class are private, and it has neither friends nor
public static member functions.  Also warn if there are no non-private
methods, and there's at least one private member function that isn't
a constructor or destructor.

@item -Wdelete-non-virtual-dtor @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wdelete-non-virtual-dtor
@opindex Wno-delete-non-virtual-dtor
Warn when @code{delete} is used to destroy an instance of a class that
has virtual functions and non-virtual destructor. It is unsafe to delete
an instance of a derived class through a pointer to a base class if the
base class does not have a virtual destructor.  This warning is enabled
by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wnarrowing @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wnarrowing
@opindex Wno-narrowing
Warn when a narrowing conversion prohibited by C++11 occurs within
@samp{@{ @}}, e.g.

@smallexample
int i = @{ 2.2 @}; // error: narrowing from double to int
@end smallexample

This flag is included in @option{-Wall} and @option{-Wc++11-compat}.

With @option{-std=c++11}, @option{-Wno-narrowing} suppresses for
non-constants the diagnostic required by the standard.  Note that this
does not affect the meaning of well-formed code; narrowing conversions
are still considered ill-formed in SFINAE context.

@item -Wnoexcept @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wnoexcept
@opindex Wno-noexcept
Warn when a noexcept-expression evaluates to false because of a call
to a function that does not have a non-throwing exception
specification (i.e. @code{throw()} or @code{noexcept}) but is known by
the compiler to never throw an exception.

@item -Wnon-virtual-dtor @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wnon-virtual-dtor
@opindex Wno-non-virtual-dtor
Warn when a class has virtual functions and an accessible non-virtual
destructor itself or in an accessible polymorphic base class, in which
case it is possible but unsafe to delete an instance of a derived
class through a pointer to the class itself or base class.  This
warning is automatically enabled if @option{-Weffc++} is specified.

@item -Wreorder @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wreorder
@opindex Wno-reorder
@cindex reordering, warning
@cindex warning for reordering of member initializers
Warn when the order of member initializers given in the code does not
match the order in which they must be executed.  For instance:

@smallexample
struct A @{
  int i;
  int j;
  A(): j (0), i (1) @{ @}
@};
@end smallexample

@noindent
The compiler rearranges the member initializers for @code{i}
and @code{j} to match the declaration order of the members, emitting
a warning to that effect.  This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@end table

The following @option{-W@dots{}} options are not affected by @option{-Wall}.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -Weffc++ @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Weffc++
@opindex Wno-effc++
Warn about violations of the following style guidelines from Scott Meyers'
@cite{Effective C++} series of books:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Define a copy constructor and an assignment operator for classes
with dynamically-allocated memory.

@item
Prefer initialization to assignment in constructors.

@item
Have @code{operator=} return a reference to @code{*this}.

@item
Don't try to return a reference when you must return an object.

@item
Distinguish between prefix and postfix forms of increment and
decrement operators.

@item
Never overload @code{&&}, @code{||}, or @code{,}.

@end itemize

This option also enables @option{-Wnon-virtual-dtor}, which is also
one of the effective C++ recommendations.  However, the check is
extended to warn about the lack of virtual destructor in accessible
non-polymorphic bases classes too.

When selecting this option, be aware that the standard library
headers do not obey all of these guidelines; use @samp{grep -v}
to filter out those warnings.

@item -Wold-style-cast @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wold-style-cast
@opindex Wno-old-style-cast
Warn if an old-style (C-style) cast to a non-void type is used within
a C++ program.  The new-style casts (@code{dynamic_cast},
@code{static_cast}, @code{reinterpret_cast}, and @code{const_cast}) are
less vulnerable to unintended effects and much easier to search for.

@item -Woverloaded-virtual @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Woverloaded-virtual
@opindex Wno-overloaded-virtual
@cindex overloaded virtual function, warning
@cindex warning for overloaded virtual function
Warn when a function declaration hides virtual functions from a
base class.  For example, in:

@smallexample
struct A @{
  virtual void f();
@};

struct B: public A @{
  void f(int);
@};
@end smallexample

the @code{A} class version of @code{f} is hidden in @code{B}, and code
like:

@smallexample
B* b;
b->f();
@end smallexample

@noindent
fails to compile.

@item -Wsign-promo @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wsign-promo
@opindex Wno-sign-promo
Warn when overload resolution chooses a promotion from unsigned or
enumerated type to a signed type, over a conversion to an unsigned type of
the same size.  Previous versions of G++ tried to preserve
unsignedness, but the standard mandates the current behavior.
@end table

@node Objective-C and Objective-C++ Dialect Options
@section Options Controlling Objective-C and Objective-C++ Dialects

@cindex compiler options, Objective-C and Objective-C++
@cindex Objective-C and Objective-C++ options, command-line
@cindex options, Objective-C and Objective-C++
(@emph{Note:} This manual does not describe the Objective-C and Objective-C++
languages themselves.  @xref{Standards,,Language Standards
Supported by LLVM}, for references.)

This section describes the command-line options that are only meaningful
for Objective-C and Objective-C++ programs.  You can also use most of
the language-independent GNU compiler options.
For example, you might compile a file @file{some_class.m} like this:

@smallexample
clang -g -fgnu-runtime -O -c some_class.m
@end smallexample

@noindent
In this example, @option{-fgnu-runtime} is an option meant only for
Objective-C and Objective-C++ programs; you can use the other options with
any language supported by LLVM@.

Note that since Objective-C is an extension of the C language, Objective-C
compilations may also use options specific to the C front-end (e.g.,
@option{-Wtraditional}).  Similarly, Objective-C++ compilations may use
C++-specific options (e.g., @option{-Wabi}).

The following GCC options for ObjectiveC and ObjectiveC++ programs are
not supported by Clang/LLVM:
@gccoptlist{-fno-nil-receivers  -fobjc-direct-dispatch  -fobjc-nilcheck @gol
-fobjc-std=objc1  -freplace-objc-classes  -fzero-link  -fno-local-ivars @gol
-fivar-visibility=@r{[}public@r{|}protected@r{|}private@r{|}package@r{]} @gol
-gen-decls  -Wassign-intercept}

Here is a list of options that are @emph{only} for compiling Objective-C
and Objective-C++ programs:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -fconstant-string-class=@var{class-name}
@opindex fconstant-string-class
Use @var{class-name} as the name of the class to instantiate for each
literal string specified with the syntax @code{@@"@dots{}"}.  The default
class name is @code{NXConstantString} if the GNU runtime is being used, and
@code{NSConstantString} if the NeXT runtime is being used (see below).  The
@option{-fconstant-cfstrings} option, if also present, overrides the
@option{-fconstant-string-class} setting and cause @code{@@"@dots{}"} literals
to be laid out as constant CoreFoundation strings.

@item -fgnu-runtime
@opindex fgnu-runtime
Generate object code compatible with the standard GNU Objective-C
runtime.  This is the default for most types of systems.

@item -fnext-runtime
@opindex fnext-runtime
Generate output compatible with the NeXT runtime.  This is the default
for NeXT-based systems, including Darwin and Mac OS X@.  The macro
@code{__NEXT_RUNTIME__} is predefined if (and only if) this option is
used.

@item -fobjc-abi-version=@var{n}
@opindex fobjc-abi-version
Use version @var{n} of the Objective-C ABI for the selected runtime.
This option is currently supported only for the NeXT runtime.  In that
case, Version 0 is the traditional (32-bit) ABI without support for
properties and other Objective-C 2.0 additions.  Version 1 is the
traditional (32-bit) ABI with support for properties and other
Objective-C 2.0 additions.  Version 2 is the modern (64-bit) ABI.  If
nothing is specified, the default is Version 0 on 32-bit target
machines, and Version 2 on 64-bit target machines.

@item -fobjc-call-cxx-cdtors
@opindex fobjc-call-cxx-cdtors
For each Objective-C class, check if any of its instance variables is a
C++ object with a non-trivial default constructor.  If so, synthesize a
special @code{- (id) .cxx_construct} instance method which runs
non-trivial default constructors on any such instance variables, in order,
and then return @code{self}.  Similarly, check if any instance variable
is a C++ object with a non-trivial destructor, and if so, synthesize a
special @code{- (void) .cxx_destruct} method which runs
all such default destructors, in reverse order.

The @code{- (id) .cxx_construct} and @code{- (void) .cxx_destruct}
methods thusly generated only operate on instance variables
declared in the current Objective-C class, and not those inherited
from superclasses.  It is the responsibility of the Objective-C
runtime to invoke all such methods in an object's inheritance
hierarchy.  The @code{- (id) .cxx_construct} methods are invoked
by the runtime immediately after a new object instance is allocated;
the @code{- (void) .cxx_destruct} methods are invoked immediately
before the runtime deallocates an object instance.

As of this writing, only the NeXT runtime on Mac OS X 10.4 and later has
support for invoking the @code{- (id) .cxx_construct} and
@code{- (void) .cxx_destruct} methods.

@item -fobjc-exceptions
@opindex fobjc-exceptions
Enable syntactic support for structured exception handling in
Objective-C, similar to what is offered by C++ and Java.  This option
is required to use the Objective-C keywords @code{@@try},
@code{@@throw}, @code{@@catch}, @code{@@finally} and
@code{@@synchronized}.  This option is available with both the GNU
runtime and the NeXT runtime (but not available in conjunction with
the NeXT runtime on Mac OS X 10.2 and earlier).

@item -fobjc-gc
@opindex fobjc-gc
Enable garbage collection (GC) in Objective-C and Objective-C++
programs.  This option is only available with the NeXT runtime; the
GNU runtime has a different garbage collection implementation that
does not require special compiler flags.

@item -Wno-protocol @r{(Objective-C and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wno-protocol
@opindex Wprotocol
If a class is declared to implement a protocol, a warning is issued for
every method in the protocol that is not implemented by the class.  The
default behavior is to issue a warning for every method not explicitly
implemented in the class, even if a method implementation is inherited
from the superclass.  If you use the @option{-Wno-protocol} option, then
methods inherited from the superclass are considered to be implemented,
and no warning is issued for them.

@item -Wselector @r{(Objective-C and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wselector
@opindex Wno-selector
Warn if multiple methods of different types for the same selector are
found during compilation.  The check is performed on the list of methods
in the final stage of compilation.  Additionally, a check is performed
for each selector appearing in a @code{@@selector(@dots{})}
expression, and a corresponding method for that selector has been found
during compilation.  Because these checks scan the method table only at
the end of compilation, these warnings are not produced if the final
stage of compilation is not reached, for example because an error is
found during compilation, or because the @option{-fsyntax-only} option is
being used.

@item -Wstrict-selector-match @r{(Objective-C and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wstrict-selector-match
@opindex Wno-strict-selector-match
Warn if multiple methods with differing argument and/or return types are
found for a given selector when attempting to send a message using this
selector to a receiver of type @code{id} or @code{Class}.  When this flag
is off (which is the default behavior), the compiler omits such warnings
if any differences found are confined to types that share the same size
and alignment.

@item -Wundeclared-selector @r{(Objective-C and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wundeclared-selector
@opindex Wno-undeclared-selector
Warn if a @code{@@selector(@dots{})} expression referring to an
undeclared selector is found.  A selector is considered undeclared if no
method with that name has been declared before the
@code{@@selector(@dots{})} expression, either explicitly in an
@code{@@interface} or @code{@@protocol} declaration, or implicitly in
an @code{@@implementation} section.  This option always performs its
checks as soon as a @code{@@selector(@dots{})} expression is found,
while @option{-Wselector} only performs its checks in the final stage of
compilation.  This also enforces the coding style convention
that methods and selectors must be declared before being used.

@item -print-objc-runtime-info
@opindex print-objc-runtime-info
Generate C header describing the largest structure that is passed by
value, if any.

@end table

@node Language Independent Options
@section Options to Control Diagnostic Messages Formatting
@cindex options to control diagnostics formatting
@cindex diagnostic messages
@cindex message formatting

Traditionally, diagnostic messages have been formatted irrespective of
the output device's aspect (e.g.@: its width, @dots{}).  You can use the
options described below
to control the formatting algorithm for diagnostic messages,
e.g.@: how many characters per line, how often source location
information should be reported.  Note that some language front ends may not
honor these options.

The following GCC option controlling diagnostic messages is not
supported by Clang/LLVM:
@gccoptlist{-fno-diagnostics-show-caret}

@table @gcctabopt
@item -fmessage-length=@var{n}
@opindex fmessage-length
Try to format error messages so that they fit on lines of about
@var{n} characters.  If @var{n} is zero, then no line-wrapping is
done; each error message appears on a single line.  This is the
default for all front ends.

@item -fdiagnostics-show-location=once
@opindex fdiagnostics-show-location
Only meaningful in line-wrapping mode.  Instructs the diagnostic messages
reporter to emit source location information @emph{once}; that is, in
case the message is too long to fit on a single physical line and has to
be wrapped, the source location won't be emitted (as prefix) again,
over and over, in subsequent continuation lines.  This is the default
behavior.

@item -fdiagnostics-show-location=every-line
Only meaningful in line-wrapping mode.  Instructs the diagnostic
messages reporter to emit the same source location information (as
prefix) for physical lines that result from the process of breaking
a message which is too long to fit on a single line.

@item -fdiagnostics-color[=@var{WHEN}]
@itemx -fno-diagnostics-color
@opindex fdiagnostics-color
@cindex highlight, color, colour
@vindex GCC_COLORS @r{environment variable}
Use color in diagnostics.  @var{WHEN} is @samp{never}, @samp{always},
or @samp{auto}.  The default depends on how the compiler has been configured,
it can be any of the above @var{WHEN} options or also @samp{never}
if @env{GCC_COLORS} environment variable isn't present in the environment,
and @samp{auto} otherwise.
@samp{auto} means to use color only when the standard error is a terminal.
The forms @option{-fdiagnostics-color} and @option{-fno-diagnostics-color} are
aliases for @option{-fdiagnostics-color=always} and
@option{-fdiagnostics-color=never}, respectively.

The colors are defined by the environment variable @env{GCC_COLORS}.
Its value is a colon-separated list of capabilities and Select Graphic
Rendition (SGR) substrings. SGR commands are interpreted by the
terminal or terminal emulator.  (See the section in the documentation
of your text terminal for permitted values and their meanings as
character attributes.)  These substring values are integers in decimal
representation and can be concatenated with semicolons.
Common values to concatenate include
@samp{1} for bold,
@samp{4} for underline,
@samp{5} for blink,
@samp{7} for inverse,
@samp{39} for default foreground color,
@samp{30} to @samp{37} for foreground colors,
@samp{90} to @samp{97} for 16-color mode foreground colors,
@samp{38;5;0} to @samp{38;5;255}
for 88-color and 256-color modes foreground colors,
@samp{49} for default background color,
@samp{40} to @samp{47} for background colors,
@samp{100} to @samp{107} for 16-color mode background colors,
and @samp{48;5;0} to @samp{48;5;255}
for 88-color and 256-color modes background colors.

The default @env{GCC_COLORS} is
@smallexample
error=01;31:warning=01;35:note=01;36:caret=01;32:locus=01:quote=01
@end smallexample
@noindent
where @samp{01;31} is bold red, @samp{01;35} is bold magenta,
@samp{01;36} is bold cyan, @samp{01;32} is bold green and
@samp{01} is bold. Setting @env{GCC_COLORS} to the empty
string disables colors.
Supported capabilities are as follows.

@table @code
@item error=
@vindex error GCC_COLORS @r{capability}
SGR substring for error: markers.

@item warning=
@vindex warning GCC_COLORS @r{capability}
SGR substring for warning: markers.

@item note=
@vindex note GCC_COLORS @r{capability}
SGR substring for note: markers.

@item caret=
@vindex caret GCC_COLORS @r{capability}
SGR substring for caret line.

@item locus=
@vindex locus GCC_COLORS @r{capability}
SGR substring for location information, @samp{file:line} or
@samp{file:line:column} etc.

@item quote=
@vindex quote GCC_COLORS @r{capability}
SGR substring for information printed within quotes.
@end table

@item -fno-diagnostics-show-option
@opindex fno-diagnostics-show-option
@opindex fdiagnostics-show-option
By default, each diagnostic emitted includes text indicating the
command-line option that directly controls the diagnostic (if such an
option is known to the diagnostic machinery).  Specifying the
@option{-fno-diagnostics-show-option} flag suppresses that behavior.

@end table

@node Warning Options
@section Options to Request or Suppress Warnings
@cindex generic options to control warnings
@cindex generic warning messages
@cindex messages, generic warning
@cindex suppressing generic warnings

Warnings are diagnostic messages that report constructions that
are not inherently erroneous but that are risky or suggest there
may have been an error.

The following GCC options controlling warning and error messages are not
supported by Clang/LLVM:
@gccoptlist{-Wno-aggressive-loop-optimizations  -Wbool-compare  -Wc90-c99-compat @gol
-Wc99-c11-compat  -Wc++14-compat  -Wno-coverage-mismatch  -Wclobbered @gol
-Wconditionally-supported  -Wno-cpp  -Wno-date-time  -Wno-designated-init @gol
-Wno-discarded-qualifiers  -Wno-discarded-qualifiers @gol
-Wno-discarded-array-qualifiers  -Wdouble-promotion  -Wfloat-conversion @gol
-Wformat-contains-nul  -Wformat-signedness  -Wno-free-nonheap-object @gol
-Wno-invalid-offsetof  -Wjump-misses-init  -Wlogical-op @gol
-Wmaybe-uninitialized  -Wmemset-transposed-args  -Wmissing-parameter-type @gol
-Wnormalized=@r{[}none@r{|}id@r{|}nfc@r{|}nfkc@r{]}  -Wold-style-declaration @gol
-Wold-style-definition  -Wopenmp-simd  -Woverride-init @gol
-Wpacked-bitfield-compat  -Wno-pedantic-ms-format -Wno-return-local-addr @gol
-Wsized-deallocation  -Wstack-usage=@var{len} -Wsuggest-attribute=@r{[}pure@r{|}const@r{|}noreturn@r{|}format@r{]} @gol
-Wsuggest-final-types  -Wsuggest-final-methods  -Wsuggest-override @gol
-Wswitch-bool  -Wsync-nand  -Wtraditional  -Wtraditional-conversion @gol
-Wtrampolines  -Wno-pragmas  -Wunsafe-loop-optimizations @gol
-Wunused-but-set-parameter  -Wunsuffixed-float-constants  @gol
-Wunused-local-typedefs  -Wunused-but-set-variable @gol
-Wvector-operation-performance  -Wvirtual-move-assign @gol
-Wzero-as-null-pointer-constant}

The following GCC options are accepted by Clang/LLVM, but do nothing, and by
default will issue a warning message:
@gccoptlist{-fmax-errors=@var{n}}

The following GCC options are accepted by Clang/LLVM, but have
different behavior
@gccoptlist{-Warray-bounds -Wformat  -Wframe-larger-than=@var{len}  -Wlarger-than=@var{len} @gol
-Wno-odr  -Wvla}

The following language-independent options do not enable specific
warnings but control the kinds of diagnostics produced by GCC@.

@table @gcctabopt
@cindex syntax checking
@item -fsyntax-only
@opindex fsyntax-only
Check the code for syntax errors, but don't do anything beyond that.

@item -fmax-errors=@var{n}
@opindex fmax-errors
This option is accepted by Clang/LLVM for compatibility with GCC, but
will do nothing, and by default issues a warning message.

@item -w
@opindex w
Inhibit all warning messages.

@item -Werror
@opindex Werror
@opindex Wno-error
Make all warnings into errors.

@item -Werror=@var{warning}
@opindex Werror=@var{warning}
@opindex Wno-error=@var{warning}
Make the specified warning into an error.  The specifier for a warning
is appended; for example @option{-Werror=switch} turns the warnings
controlled by @option{-Wswitch} into errors.  This switch takes a
negative form, to be used to negate @option{-Werror} for specific
warnings; for example @option{-Wno-error=switch} makes
@option{-Wswitch} warnings not be errors, even when @option{-Werror}
is in effect.

The warning message for each controllable warning includes the
option that controls the warning.  That option can then be used with
@option{-Werror=} and @option{-Wno-error=} as described above.
(Printing of the option in the warning message can be disabled using the
@option{-fno-diagnostics-show-option} flag.)

Note that specifying @option{-Werror=}@var{foo} automatically implies
@option{-W}@var{foo}.  However, @option{-Wno-error=}@var{foo} does not
imply anything.

@item -Wfatal-errors
@item -Wno-fatal-errors
@opindex Wfatal-errors
@opindex Wno-fatal-errors
This option causes the compiler to abort compilation on the first error
occurred rather than trying to keep going and printing further error
messages.

@end table

You can request many specific warnings with options beginning with
@samp{-W}, for example @option{-Wimplicit} to request warnings on
implicit declarations.  Each of these specific warning options also
has a negative form beginning @samp{-Wno-} to turn off warnings; for
example, @option{-Wno-implicit}.  This manual lists only one of the
two forms, whichever is not the default, although both are listed in
the index.  For further preprocessor-specific options also refer to
@xref{Preprocessor Options}.  For further language-specific options
also refer to @xref{C Dialect Options}, @ref{C++ Dialect Options} and
@ref{Objective-C and Objective-C++ Dialect Options}.  For convenience,
options in these sections are cross-referenced from here.

Some options, such as @option{-Wall} and @option{-Wextra}, turn on other
options, such as @option{-Wunused}, which may turn on further options,
such as @option{-Wunused-value}. The combined effect of positive and
negative forms is that more specific options have priority over less
specific ones, independently of their position in the command-line. For
options of the same specificity, the last one takes effect. Options
enabled or disabled via pragmas (@pxref{Diagnostic Pragmas}) take effect
as if they appeared at the end of the command-line.

When an unrecognized warning option is requested (e.g.,
@option{-Wunknown-warning}), LLVM emits a diagnostic stating
that the option is not recognized.  However, if the @option{-Wno-} form
is used, the behavior is slightly different: no diagnostic is
produced for @option{-Wno-unknown-warning} unless other diagnostics
are being produced.  This allows the use of new @option{-Wno-} options
with old compilers, but if something goes wrong, the compiler
warns that an unrecognized option is present.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -Wpedantic
@itemx -pedantic
@opindex pedantic
@opindex Wpedantic
Issue all the warnings demanded by strict ISO C and ISO C++;
reject all programs that use forbidden extensions, and some other
programs that do not follow ISO C and ISO C++.  For ISO C, follows the
version of the ISO C standard specified by any @option{-std} option used.

Valid ISO C and ISO C++ programs should compile properly with or without
this option (though a rare few require @option{-ansi} or a
@option{-std} option specifying the required version of ISO C)@.  However,
without this option, certain GNU extensions and traditional C and C++
features are supported as well.  With this option, they are rejected.

@option{-Wpedantic} does not cause warning messages for use of the
alternate keywords whose names begin and end with @samp{__}.  Pedantic
warnings are also disabled in the expression that follows
@code{__extension__}.  However, only system header files should use
these escape routes; application programs should avoid them.
@xref{Alternate Keywords}.

Some users try to use @option{-Wpedantic} to check programs for strict ISO
C conformance.  They soon find that it does not do quite what they want:
it finds some non-ISO practices, but not all---only those for which
ISO C @emph{requires} a diagnostic, and some others for which
diagnostics have been added.

A feature to report any failure to conform to ISO C might be useful in
some instances, but would require considerable additional work and would
be quite different from @option{-Wpedantic}.  We don't have plans to
support such a feature in the near future.

Where the standard specified with @option{-std} represents a GNU
extended dialect of C, such as @samp{gnu90} or @samp{gnu99}, there is a
corresponding @dfn{base standard}, the version of ISO C on which the GNU
extended dialect is based.  Warnings from @option{-Wpedantic} are given
where they are required by the base standard.  (It does not make sense
for such warnings to be given only for features not in the specified GNU
C dialect, since by definition the GNU dialects of C include all
features the compiler supports with the given option, and there would be
nothing to warn about.)

@item -pedantic-errors
@opindex pedantic-errors
Give an error whenever the @dfn{base standard} (see @option{-Wpedantic})
requires a diagnostic, in some cases where there is undefined behavior
at compile-time and in some other cases that do not prevent compilation
of programs that are valid according to the standard. This is not
equivalent to @option{-Werror=pedantic}, since there are errors enabled
by this option and not enabled by the latter and vice versa.

@item -Wall
@opindex Wall
@opindex Wno-all
This enables all the warnings about constructions that some users
consider questionable, and that are easy to avoid (or modify to
prevent the warning), even in conjunction with macros.  This also
enables some language-specific warnings described in @ref{C++ Dialect
Options} and @ref{Objective-C and Objective-C++ Dialect Options}.

@option{-Wall} turns on the following warning flags:

@gccoptlist{-Waddress   @gol
-Warray-bounds=1 @r{(only with} @option{-O2}@r{)}  @gol
-Wc++11-compat  -Wc++14-compat@gol
-Wchar-subscripts  @gol
-Wenum-compare @r{(in C/ObjC; this is on by default in C++)} @gol
-Wimplicit-int @r{(C and Objective-C only)} @gol
-Wimplicit-function-declaration @r{(C and Objective-C only)} @gol
-Wcomment  @gol
-Wformat   @gol
-Wmain @r{(only for C/ObjC and unless} @option{-ffreestanding}@r{)}  @gol
-Wmaybe-uninitialized @gol
-Wmissing-braces @r{(only for C/ObjC)} @gol
-Wnonnull  @gol
-Wopenmp-simd @gol
-Wparentheses  @gol
-Wpointer-sign  @gol
-Wreorder   @gol
-Wreturn-type  @gol
-Wsequence-point  @gol
-Wsign-compare @r{(only in C++)}  @gol
-Wstrict-aliasing  @gol
-Wstrict-overflow=1  @gol
-Wswitch  @gol
-Wtrigraphs  @gol
-Wuninitialized  @gol
-Wunknown-pragmas  @gol
-Wunused-function  @gol
-Wunused-label     @gol
-Wunused-value     @gol
-Wunused-variable  @gol
-Wvolatile-register-var @gol
}

Note that some warning flags are not implied by @option{-Wall}.  Some of
them warn about constructions that users generally do not consider
questionable, but which occasionally you might wish to check for;
others warn about constructions that are necessary or hard to avoid in
some cases, and there is no simple way to modify the code to suppress
the warning. Some of them are enabled by @option{-Wextra} but many of
them must be enabled individually.

@item -Wextra
@opindex W
@opindex Wextra
@opindex Wno-extra
This enables some extra warning flags that are not enabled by
@option{-Wall}. (This option used to be called @option{-W}.  The older
name is still supported, but the newer name is more descriptive.)

@gccoptlist{-Wclobbered  @gol
-Wempty-body  @gol
-Wignored-qualifiers @gol
-Wmissing-field-initializers  @gol
-Wmissing-parameter-type @r{(C only)}  @gol
-Wold-style-declaration @r{(C only)}  @gol
-Woverride-init  @gol
-Wsign-compare  @gol
-Wtype-limits  @gol
-Wuninitialized  @gol
-Wunused-parameter @r{(only with} @option{-Wunused} @r{or} @option{-Wall}@r{)} @gol
-Wunused-but-set-parameter @r{(only with} @option{-Wunused} @r{or} @option{-Wall}@r{)}  @gol
}

The option @option{-Wextra} also prints warning messages for the
following cases:

@itemize @bullet

@item
A pointer is compared against integer zero with @code{<}, @code{<=},
@code{>}, or @code{>=}.

@item
(C++ only) An enumerator and a non-enumerator both appear in a
conditional expression.

@item
(C++ only) Ambiguous virtual bases.

@item
(C++ only) Subscripting an array that has been declared @code{register}.

@item
(C++ only) Taking the address of a variable that has been declared
@code{register}.

@item
(C++ only) A base class is not initialized in a derived class's copy
constructor.

@end itemize

@item -Waddress
@opindex Waddress
@opindex Wno-address
Warn about suspicious uses of memory addresses. These include using
the address of a function in a conditional expression, such as
@code{void func(void); if (func)}, and comparisons against the memory
address of a string literal, such as @code{if (x == "abc")}.  Such
uses typically indicate a programmer error: the address of a function
always evaluates to true, so their use in a conditional usually
indicate that the programmer forgot the parentheses in a function
call; and comparisons against string literals result in unspecified
behavior and are not portable in C, so they usually indicate that the
programmer intended to use @code{strcmp}.  This warning is enabled by
@option{-Wall}.

@item -Waggregate-return
@opindex Waggregate-return
@opindex Wno-aggregate-return
Warn if any functions that return structures or unions are defined or
called.  (In languages where you can return an array, this also elicits
a warning.)

@item -Warray-bounds
@opindex Wno-array-bounds
@opindex Warray-bounds
Unlike GCC, Clang/LLVM does not support the
@option{-Warray-bounds=@var{n}} variant.  This option warns about
subscripts to arrays that are always out of bounds. This warning is
enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wno-attributes
@opindex Wno-attributes
@opindex Wattributes
Do not warn if an unexpected @code{__attribute__} is used, such as
unrecognized attributes, function attributes applied to variables,
etc.  This does not stop errors for incorrect use of supported
attributes.

@item -Wno-builtin-macro-redefined
@opindex Wno-builtin-macro-redefined
@opindex Wbuiltin-macro-redefined
Do not warn if certain built-in macros are redefined.  This suppresses
warnings for redefinition of @code{__TIMESTAMP__}, @code{__TIME__},
@code{__DATE__}, @code{__FILE__}, and @code{__BASE_FILE__}.

@item -Wcast-align
@opindex Wcast-align
@opindex Wno-cast-align
Warn whenever a pointer is cast such that the required alignment of the
target is increased.  For example, warn if a @code{char *} is cast to
an @code{int *} on machines where integers can only be accessed at
two- or four-byte boundaries.

@item -Wcast-qual
@opindex Wcast-qual
@opindex Wno-cast-qual
Warn whenever a pointer is cast so as to remove a type qualifier from
the target type.  For example, warn if a @code{const char *} is cast
to an ordinary @code{char *}.

Also warn when making a cast that introduces a type qualifier in an
unsafe way.  For example, casting @code{char **} to @code{const char **}
is unsafe, as in this example:

@smallexample
  /* p is char ** value.  */
  const char **q = (const char **) p;
  /* Assignment of readonly string to const char * is OK.  */
  *q = "string";
  /* Now char** pointer points to read-only memory.  */
  **p = 'b';
@end smallexample

@item -Wchar-subscripts
@opindex Wchar-subscripts
@opindex Wno-char-subscripts
Warn if an array subscript has type @code{char}.  This is a common cause
of error, as programmers often forget that this type is signed on some
machines.
This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wcomment
@opindex Wcomment
@opindex Wcomments
@opindex Wno-comment
@opindex Wno-comments
Warn whenever a comment-start sequence @samp{/*} appears in a @samp{/*}
comment, or whenever a Backslash-Newline appears in a @samp{//} comment.
This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wconversion
@opindex Wconversion
@opindex Wno-conversion
Warn for implicit conversions that may alter a value. This includes
conversions between real and integer, like @code{abs (x)} when
@code{x} is @code{double}; conversions between signed and unsigned,
like @code{unsigned ui = -1}; and conversions to smaller types, like
@code{sqrtf (M_PI)}. Do not warn for explicit casts like @code{abs
((int) x)} and @code{ui = (unsigned) -1}, or if the value is not
changed by the conversion like in @code{abs (2.0)}.  Warnings about
conversions between signed and unsigned integers can be disabled by
using @option{-Wno-sign-conversion}.

For C++, also warn for confusing overload resolution for user-defined
conversions; and conversions that never use a type conversion
operator: conversions to @code{void}, the same type, a base class or a
reference to them. Warnings about conversions between signed and
unsigned integers are disabled by default in C++ unless
@option{-Wsign-conversion} is explicitly enabled.

@item -Wno-deprecated
@opindex Wno-deprecated
@opindex Wdeprecated
Do not warn about usage of deprecated features.  @xref{Deprecated Features}.

@item -Wno-deprecated-declarations
@opindex Wno-deprecated-declarations
@opindex Wdeprecated-declarations
Do not warn about uses of functions (@pxref{Function Attributes}),
variables (@pxref{Variable Attributes}), and types (@pxref{Type
Attributes}) marked as deprecated by using the @code{deprecated}
attribute.

@item -Wdisabled-optimization
@opindex Wdisabled-optimization
@opindex Wno-disabled-optimization
Warn if a requested optimization pass is disabled.  This warning does
not generally indicate that there is anything wrong with your code; it
merely indicates that LLVM's optimizers are unable to handle the code
effectively.  Often, the problem is that your code is too big or too
complex; LLVM refuses to optimize programs when the optimization
itself is likely to take inordinate amounts of time.

@item -Wno-div-by-zero
@opindex Wno-div-by-zero
@opindex Wdiv-by-zero
Do not warn about compile-time integer division by zero.  Floating-point
division by zero is not warned about, as it can be a legitimate way of
obtaining infinities and NaNs.

@item -Wempty-body
@opindex Wempty-body
@opindex Wno-empty-body
Warn if an empty body occurs in an @code{if}, @code{else} or @code{do
while} statement.  This warning is also enabled by @option{-Wextra}.

@item -Wenum-compare
@opindex Wenum-compare
@opindex Wno-enum-compare
Warn about a comparison between values of different enumerated types.
In C++ enumeral mismatches in conditional expressions are also
diagnosed and the warning is enabled by default.  In C this warning is
enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wfloat-equal
@opindex Wfloat-equal
@opindex Wno-float-equal
Warn if floating-point values are used in equality comparisons.

The idea behind this is that sometimes it is convenient (for the
programmer) to consider floating-point values as approximations to
infinitely precise real numbers.  If you are doing this, then you need
to compute (by analyzing the code, or in some other way) the maximum or
likely maximum error that the computation introduces, and allow for it
when performing comparisons (and when producing output, but that's a
different problem).  In particular, instead of testing for equality, you
should check to see whether the two values have ranges that overlap; and
this is done with the relational operators, so equality comparisons are
probably mistaken.

@item -Wformat
@itemx -Wformat=@var{n}
@opindex Wformat
@opindex Wno-format
@opindex ffreestanding
@opindex fno-builtin
Check calls to @code{printf} and @code{scanf}, etc., to make sure that
the arguments supplied have types appropriate to the format string
specified, and that the conversions specified in the format string make
sense.  This includes standard functions, and others specified by format
attributes (@pxref{Function Attributes}), in the @code{printf},
@code{scanf}, @code{strftime} and @code{strfmon} (an X/Open extension,
not in the C standard) families (or other target-specific families).
Which functions are checked without format attributes having been
specified depends on the standard version selected, and such checks of
functions without the attribute specified are disabled by
@option{-ffreestanding} or @option{-fno-builtin}.

The formats are checked against the format features supported by GNU
libc version 2.2.  These include all ISO C90 and C99 features, as well
as features from the Single Unix Specification and some BSD and GNU
extensions.  Other library implementations may not support all these
features; LLVM does not support warning about features that go beyond a
particular library's limitations.  However, if @option{-Wpedantic} is used
with @option{-Wformat}, warnings are given about format features not
in the selected standard version (but not for @code{strfmon} formats,
since those are not in any version of the C standard).  @xref{C Dialect
Options,,Options Controlling C Dialect}.

Unlike GCC, Clang/LLVM does not support the @option{-Wformat=@var{n}}
version of this option.

@item -Wno-format-extra-args
@opindex Wno-format-extra-args
@opindex Wformat-extra-args
If @option{-Wformat} is specified, do not warn about excess arguments to a
@code{printf} or @code{scanf} format function.  The C standard specifies
that such arguments are ignored.

Where the unused arguments lie between used arguments that are
specified with @samp{$} operand number specifications, normally
warnings are still given, since the implementation could not know what
type to pass to @code{va_arg} to skip the unused arguments.  However,
in the case of @code{scanf} formats, this option suppresses the
warning if the unused arguments are all pointers, since the Single
Unix Specification says that such unused arguments are allowed.

@item -Wformat-nonliteral
@opindex Wformat-nonliteral
@opindex Wno-format-nonliteral
If @option{-Wformat} is specified, also warn if the format string is not a
string literal and so cannot be checked, unless the format function
takes its format arguments as a @code{va_list}.

@item -Wformat-security
@opindex Wformat-security
@opindex Wno-format-security
If @option{-Wformat} is specified, also warn about uses of format
functions that represent possible security problems.  At present, this
warns about calls to @code{printf} and @code{scanf} functions where the
format string is not a string literal and there are no format arguments,
as in @code{printf (foo);}.  This may be a security hole if the format
string came from untrusted input and contains @samp{%n}.  (This is
currently a subset of what @option{-Wformat-nonliteral} warns about, but
in future warnings may be added to @option{-Wformat-security} that are not
included in @option{-Wformat-nonliteral}.)

@item -Wformat-y2k
@opindex Wformat-y2k
@opindex Wno-format-y2k
If @option{-Wformat} is specified, also warn about @code{strftime}
formats that may yield only a two-digit year.

@item -Wno-format-zero-length
@opindex Wno-format-zero-length
@opindex Wformat-zero-length
If @option{-Wformat} is specified, do not warn about zero-length formats.
The C standard specifies that zero-length formats are allowed.

@item -Wframe-larger-than=@var{len}
@opindex Wframe-larger-than
Warn if the size of a function frame is larger than @var{len} bytes.
The computation done to determine the stack frame size is approximate
and not conservative.
The actual requirements may be somewhat greater than @var{len}
even if you do not get a warning.  In addition, any space allocated
via @code{alloca}, variable-length arrays, or related constructs
is not included by the compiler when determining
whether or not to issue a warning.

@emph{Note:}  It appears that Clang/LLVM may just silently ignore this
option.  Some experimentation for any particular architecture is advised.

@item -Winline
@opindex Winline
@opindex Wno-inline
Warn if a function that is declared as inline cannot be inlined.
Even with this option, the compiler does not warn about failures to
inline functions declared in system headers.

The compiler uses a variety of heuristics to determine whether or not
to inline a function.  For example, the compiler takes into account
the size of the function being inlined and the amount of inlining
that has already been done in the current function.  Therefore,
seemingly insignificant changes in the source program can cause the
warnings produced by @option{-Winline} to appear or disappear.

@item -Wno-int-to-pointer-cast
@opindex Wno-int-to-pointer-cast
@opindex Wint-to-pointer-cast
Suppress warnings from casts to pointer type of an integer of a
different size. In C++, casting to a pointer type of smaller size is
an error. @option{Wint-to-pointer-cast} is enabled by default.

@item -Winvalid-pch
@opindex Winvalid-pch
@opindex Wno-invalid-pch
Warn if a precompiled header (@pxref{Precompiled Headers}) is found in
the search path but can't be used.

@item -Wlarger-than=@var{len}
@opindex Wlarger-than=@var{len}
@opindex Wlarger-than-@var{len}
Warn whenever an object of larger than @var{len} bytes is defined.

@emph{Note:}  It appears that Clang/LLVM may just silently ignore this
option.  Some experimentation for any particular architecture is advised.

@item -Wlogical-not-parentheses
@opindex Wlogical-not-parentheses
@opindex Wno-logical-not-parentheses
Warn about logical not used on the left hand side operand of a comparison.
This option does not warn if the RHS operand is of a boolean type.  Its
purpose is to detect suspicious code like the following:
@smallexample
int a;
@dots{}
if (!a > 1) @{ @dots{} @}
@end smallexample

It is possible to suppress the warning by wrapping the LHS into
parentheses:
@smallexample
if ((!a) > 1) @{ @dots{} @}
@end smallexample

This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wlong-long
@opindex Wlong-long
@opindex Wno-long-long
Warn if @code{long long} type is used.  This is enabled by either
@option{-Wpedantic} or @option{-Wtraditional} in ISO C90 and C++98
modes.  To inhibit the warning messages, use @option{-Wno-long-long}.

@item -Wmain
@opindex Wmain
@opindex Wno-main
Warn if the type of @code{main} is suspicious.  @code{main} should be
a function with external linkage, returning int, taking either zero
arguments, two, or three arguments of appropriate types.  This warning
is enabled by default in C++ and is enabled by either @option{-Wall}
or @option{-Wpedantic}.

@item -Wmissing-braces
@opindex Wmissing-braces
@opindex Wno-missing-braces
Warn if an aggregate or union initializer is not fully bracketed.  In
the following example, the initializer for @code{a} is not fully
bracketed, but that for @code{b} is fully bracketed.  This warning is
enabled by @option{-Wall} in C.

@smallexample
int a[2][2] = @{ 0, 1, 2, 3 @};
int b[2][2] = @{ @{ 0, 1 @}, @{ 2, 3 @} @};
@end smallexample

This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wmissing-field-initializers
@opindex Wmissing-field-initializers
@opindex Wno-missing-field-initializers
@opindex W
@opindex Wextra
@opindex Wno-extra
Warn if a structure's initializer has some fields missing.  For
example, the following code causes such a warning, because
@code{x.h} is implicitly zero:

@smallexample
struct s @{ int f, g, h; @};
struct s x = @{ 3, 4 @};
@end smallexample

This option does not warn about designated initializers, so the following
modification does not trigger a warning:

@smallexample
struct s @{ int f, g, h; @};
struct s x = @{ .f = 3, .g = 4 @};
@end smallexample

In C++ this option does not warn either about the empty @{ @}
initializer, for example:

@smallexample
struct s @{ int f, g, h; @};
s x = @{ @};
@end smallexample

This warning is included in @option{-Wextra}.  To get other @option{-Wextra}
warnings without this one, use @option{-Wextra -Wno-missing-field-initializers}.

@item -Wmissing-format-attribute
@opindex Wmissing-format-attribute
@opindex Wno-missing-format-attribute

Warn about function pointers that might be candidates for
@code{format} attributes.  Note these are only possible candidates,
not absolute ones.  GCC guesses that function pointers with
@code{format} attributes that are used in assignment, initialization,
parameter passing or return statements should have a corresponding
@code{format} attribute in the resulting type.  I.e.@: the left-hand
side of the assignment or initialization, the type of the parameter
variable, or the return type of the containing function respectively
should also have a @code{format} attribute to avoid the warning.

GCC also warns about function definitions that might be candidates for
@code{format} attributes.  Again, these are only possible candidates.
GCC guesses that @code{format} attributes might be appropriate for any
function that calls a function like @code{vprintf} or @code{vscanf},
but this might not always be the case, and some functions for which
@code{format} attributes are appropriate may not be detected.

@item -Wno-multichar
@opindex Wno-multichar
@opindex Wmultichar
Do not warn if a multicharacter constant (@samp{'FOOF'}) is used.
Usually they indicate a typo in the user's code, as they have
implementation-defined values, and should not be used in portable code.

@item -Wnonnull
@opindex Wnonnull
@opindex Wno-nonnull
Warn about passing a null pointer for arguments marked as
requiring a non-null value by the @code{nonnull} function attribute.

@option{-Wnonnull} is included in @option{-Wall} and @option{-Wformat}.  It
can be disabled with the @option{-Wno-nonnull} option.

@item -Wno-odr
@opindex Wno-odr
@opindex Wodr
Warn about One Definition Rule violations during link-time
optimization.  Enabled by default.

@emph{Note:} It is not clear whether this option does anything with
LLVM, since with GCC it requires @option{-flto-odr-type-merging} to be
enabled, and this flag is not available with Clang/LLVM.

@item -Wno-overflow
@opindex Wno-overflow
@opindex Woverflow
Do not warn about compile-time overflow in constant expressions.

@item -Woverlength-strings
@opindex Woverlength-strings
@opindex Wno-overlength-strings
Warn about string constants that are longer than the ``minimum
maximum'' length specified in the C standard.  Modern compilers
generally allow string constants that are much longer than the
standard's minimum limit, but very portable programs should avoid
using longer strings.

The limit applies @emph{after} string constant concatenation, and does
not count the trailing NUL@.  In C90, the limit was 509 characters; in
C99, it was raised to 4095.  C++98 does not specify a normative
minimum maximum, so we do not diagnose overlength strings in C++@.

This option is implied by @option{-Wpedantic}, and can be disabled with
@option{-Wno-overlength-strings}.

@item -Wpacked
@opindex Wpacked
@opindex Wno-packed
Warn if a structure is given the packed attribute, but the packed
attribute has no effect on the layout or size of the structure.
Such structures may be mis-aligned for little benefit.  For
instance, in this code, the variable @code{f.x} in @code{struct bar}
is misaligned even though @code{struct bar} does not itself
have the packed attribute:

@smallexample
@group
struct foo @{
  int x;
  char a, b, c, d;
@} __attribute__((packed));
struct bar @{
  char z;
  struct foo f;
@};
@end group
@end smallexample

@item -Wpadded
@opindex Wpadded
@opindex Wno-padded
Warn if padding is included in a structure, either to align an element
of the structure or to align the whole structure.  Sometimes when this
happens it is possible to rearrange the fields of the structure to
reduce the padding and so make the structure smaller.

@item -Wparentheses
@opindex Wparentheses
@opindex Wno-parentheses
Warn if parentheses are omitted in certain contexts, such
as when there is an assignment in a context where a truth value
is expected, or when operators are nested whose precedence people
often get confused about.

Also warn if a comparison like @code{x<=y<=z} appears; this is
equivalent to @code{(x<=y ? 1 : 0) <= z}, which is a different
interpretation from that of ordinary mathematical notation.

Also warn about constructions where there may be confusion to which
@code{if} statement an @code{else} branch belongs.  Here is an example of
such a case:

@smallexample
@group
@{
  if (a)
    if (b)
      foo ();
  else
    bar ();
@}
@end group
@end smallexample

In C/C++, every @code{else} branch belongs to the innermost possible
@code{if} statement, which in this example is @code{if (b)}.  This is
often not what the programmer expected, as illustrated in the above
example by indentation the programmer chose.  When there is the
potential for this confusion, LLVM issues a warning when this flag
is specified.  To eliminate the warning, add explicit braces around
the innermost @code{if} statement so there is no way the @code{else}
can belong to the enclosing @code{if}.  The resulting code
looks like this:

@smallexample
@group
@{
  if (a)
    @{
      if (b)
        foo ();
      else
        bar ();
    @}
@}
@end group
@end smallexample

Also warn for dangerous uses of the GNU extension to
@code{?:} with omitted middle operand. When the condition
in the @code{?}: operator is a boolean expression, the omitted value is
always 1.  Often programmers expect it to be a value computed
inside the conditional expression instead.

This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wpointer-arith
@opindex Wpointer-arith
@opindex Wno-pointer-arith
Warn about anything that depends on the ``size of'' a function type or
of @code{void}.  GNU C assigns these types a size of 1, for
convenience in calculations with @code{void *} pointers and pointers
to functions.  In C++, warn also when an arithmetic operation involves
@code{NULL}.  This warning is also enabled by @option{-Wpedantic}.

@item -Wredundant-decls
@opindex Wredundant-decls
@opindex Wno-redundant-decls
Warn if anything is declared more than once in the same scope, even in
cases where multiple declaration is valid and changes nothing.

@item -Wreturn-type
@opindex Wreturn-type
@opindex Wno-return-type
Warn whenever a function is defined with a return type that defaults
to @code{int}.  Also warn about any @code{return} statement with no
return value in a function whose return type is not @code{void}
(falling off the end of the function body is considered returning
without a value), and about a @code{return} statement with an
expression in a function whose return type is @code{void}.

For C++, a function without return type always produces a diagnostic
message, even when @option{-Wno-return-type} is specified.  The only
exceptions are @code{main} and functions defined in system headers.

This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wsequence-point
@opindex Wsequence-point
@opindex Wno-sequence-point
Warn about code that may have undefined semantics because of violations
of sequence point rules in the C and C++ standards.

The C and C++ standards define the order in which expressions in a C/C++
program are evaluated in terms of @dfn{sequence points}, which represent
a partial ordering between the execution of parts of the program: those
executed before the sequence point, and those executed after it.  These
occur after the evaluation of a full expression (one which is not part
of a larger expression), after the evaluation of the first operand of a
@code{&&}, @code{||}, @code{? :} or @code{,} (comma) operator, before a
function is called (but after the evaluation of its arguments and the
expression denoting the called function), and in certain other places.
Other than as expressed by the sequence point rules, the order of
evaluation of subexpressions of an expression is not specified.  All
these rules describe only a partial order rather than a total order,
since, for example, if two functions are called within one expression
with no sequence point between them, the order in which the functions
are called is not specified.  However, the standards committee have
ruled that function calls do not overlap.

It is not specified when between sequence points modifications to the
values of objects take effect.  Programs whose behavior depends on this
have undefined behavior; the C and C++ standards specify that ``Between
the previous and next sequence point an object shall have its stored
value modified at most once by the evaluation of an expression.
Furthermore, the prior value shall be read only to determine the value
to be stored.''.  If a program breaks these rules, the results on any
particular implementation are entirely unpredictable.

Examples of code with undefined behavior are @code{a = a++;}, @code{a[n]
= b[n++]} and @code{a[i++] = i;}.  Some more complicated cases are not
diagnosed by this option, and it may give an occasional false positive
result, but in general it has been found fairly effective at detecting
this sort of problem in programs.

The standard is worded confusingly, therefore there is some debate
over the precise meaning of the sequence point rules in subtle cases.
Links to discussions of the problem, including proposed formal
definitions, may be found on the GCC readings page, at
@uref{http://gcc.gnu.org/@/readings.html}.

This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall} for C and C++.

@item -Wshadow
@opindex Wshadow
@opindex Wno-shadow
Warn whenever a local variable or type declaration shadows another
variable, parameter, type, class member (in C++), or instance variable
(in Objective-C) or whenever a built-in function is shadowed. Note
that in C++, the compiler warns if a local variable shadows an
explicit typedef, but not if it shadows a struct/class/enum.

@item -Wno-shadow-ivar @r{(Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wno-shadow-ivar
@opindex Wshadow-ivar
Do not warn whenever a local variable shadows an instance variable in an
Objective-C method.

@item -Wshift-count-negative
@opindex Wshift-count-negative
@opindex Wno-shift-count-negative
Warn if shift count is negative. This warning is enabled by default.

@item -Wshift-count-overflow
@opindex Wshift-count-overflow
@opindex Wno-shift-count-overflow
Warn if shift count >= width of type. This warning is enabled by default.

@item -Wsign-compare
@opindex Wsign-compare
@opindex Wno-sign-compare
@cindex warning for comparison of signed and unsigned values
@cindex comparison of signed and unsigned values, warning
@cindex signed and unsigned values, comparison warning
Warn when a comparison between signed and unsigned values could produce
an incorrect result when the signed value is converted to unsigned.
This warning is also enabled by @option{-Wextra}; to get the other warnings
of @option{-Wextra} without this warning, use
@option{-Wextra -Wno-sign-compare}.

@item -Wsign-conversion
@opindex Wsign-conversion
@opindex Wno-sign-conversion
Warn for implicit conversions that may change the sign of an integer
value, like assigning a signed integer expression to an unsigned
integer variable. An explicit cast silences the warning. In C, this
option is enabled also by @option{-Wconversion}.

@item -Wsizeof-array-argument
@opindex Wsizeof-array-argument
@opindex Wno-sizeof-array-argument
Warn when the @code{sizeof} operator is applied to a parameter that is
declared as an array in a function definition.  This warning is enabled by
default for C and C++ programs.

@item -Wsizeof-pointer-memaccess
@opindex Wsizeof-pointer-memaccess
@opindex Wno-sizeof-pointer-memaccess
Warn for suspicious length parameters to certain string and memory built-in
functions if the argument uses @code{sizeof}.  This warning warns e.g.@:
about @code{memset (ptr, 0, sizeof (ptr));} if @code{ptr} is not an array,
but a pointer, and suggests a possible fix, or about
@code{memcpy (&foo, ptr, sizeof (&foo));}.  This warning is enabled by
@option{-Wall}.

@item -Wstack-protector
@opindex Wstack-protector
@opindex Wno-stack-protector
This option is only active when @option{-fstack-protector} is active.  It
warns about functions that are not protected against stack smashing.

@item -Wstrict-aliasing
@opindex Wstrict-aliasing
@opindex Wno-strict-aliasing
This option is only active when @option{-fstrict-aliasing} is active.
It warns about code that might break the strict aliasing rules that the
compiler is using for optimization.  The warning does not catch all
cases, but does attempt to catch the more common pitfalls.  It is
included in @option{-Wall}.
It is equivalent to @option{-Wstrict-aliasing=3}

@item -Wstrict-aliasing=n
@opindex Wstrict-aliasing=n
This option is only active when @option{-fstrict-aliasing} is active.
It warns about code that might break the strict aliasing rules that the
compiler is using for optimization.
Higher levels correspond to higher accuracy (fewer false positives).
Higher levels also correspond to more effort, similar to the way @option{-O}
works.
@option{-Wstrict-aliasing} is equivalent to @option{-Wstrict-aliasing=3}.

Level 1: Most aggressive, quick, least accurate.
Possibly useful when higher levels
do not warn but @option{-fstrict-aliasing} still breaks the code, as it has very few
false negatives.  However, it has many false positives.
Warns for all pointer conversions between possibly incompatible types,
even if never dereferenced.  Runs in the front end only.

Level 2: Aggressive, quick, not too precise.
May still have many false positives (not as many as level 1 though),
and few false negatives (but possibly more than level 1).
Unlike level 1, it only warns when an address is taken.  Warns about
incomplete types.  Runs in the front end only.

Level 3 (default for @option{-Wstrict-aliasing}):
Should have very few false positives and few false
negatives.  Slightly slower than levels 1 or 2 when optimization is enabled.
Takes care of the common pun+dereference pattern in the front end:
@code{*(int*)&some_float}.
If optimization is enabled, it also runs in the back end, where it deals
with multiple statement cases using flow-sensitive points-to information.
Only warns when the converted pointer is dereferenced.
Does not warn about incomplete types.

@item -Wstrict-overflow
@itemx -Wstrict-overflow=@var{n}
@opindex Wstrict-overflow
@opindex Wno-strict-overflow
This option is only active when @option{-fstrict-overflow} is active.
It warns about cases where the compiler optimizes based on the
assumption that signed overflow does not occur.  Note that it does not
warn about all cases where the code might overflow: it only warns
about cases where the compiler implements some optimization.  Thus
this warning depends on the optimization level.

An optimization that assumes that signed overflow does not occur is
perfectly safe if the values of the variables involved are such that
overflow never does, in fact, occur.  Therefore this warning can
easily give a false positive: a warning about code that is not
actually a problem.  To help focus on important issues, several
warning levels are defined.  No warnings are issued for the use of
undefined signed overflow when estimating how many iterations a loop
requires, in particular when determining whether a loop will be
executed at all.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -Wstrict-overflow=1
Warn about cases that are both questionable and easy to avoid.  For
example,  with @option{-fstrict-overflow}, the compiler simplifies
@code{x + 1 > x} to @code{1}.  This level of
@option{-Wstrict-overflow} is enabled by @option{-Wall}; higher levels
are not, and must be explicitly requested.

@item -Wstrict-overflow=2
Also warn about other cases where a comparison is simplified to a
constant.  For example: @code{abs (x) >= 0}.  This can only be
simplified when @option{-fstrict-overflow} is in effect, because
@code{abs (INT_MIN)} overflows to @code{INT_MIN}, which is less than
zero.  @option{-Wstrict-overflow} (with no level) is the same as
@option{-Wstrict-overflow=2}.

@item -Wstrict-overflow=3
Also warn about other cases where a comparison is simplified.  For
example: @code{x + 1 > 1} is simplified to @code{x > 0}.

@item -Wstrict-overflow=4
Also warn about other simplifications not covered by the above cases.
For example: @code{(x * 10) / 5} is simplified to @code{x * 2}.

@item -Wstrict-overflow=5
Also warn about cases where the compiler reduces the magnitude of a
constant involved in a comparison.  For example: @code{x + 2 > y} is
simplified to @code{x + 1 >= y}.  This is reported only at the
highest warning level because this simplification applies to many
comparisons, so this warning level gives a very large number of
false positives.
@end table

@item -Wswitch
@opindex Wswitch
@opindex Wno-switch
Warn whenever a @code{switch} statement has an index of enumerated type
and lacks a @code{case} for one or more of the named codes of that
enumeration.  (The presence of a @code{default} label prevents this
warning.)  @code{case} labels outside the enumeration range also
provoke warnings when this option is used (even if there is a
@code{default} label).
This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wswitch-default
@opindex Wswitch-default
@opindex Wno-switch-default
Warn whenever a @code{switch} statement does not have a @code{default}
case.

@item -Wswitch-enum
@opindex Wswitch-enum
@opindex Wno-switch-enum
Warn whenever a @code{switch} statement has an index of enumerated type
and lacks a @code{case} for one or more of the named codes of that
enumeration.  @code{case} labels outside the enumeration range also
provoke warnings when this option is used.  The only difference
between @option{-Wswitch} and this option is that this option gives a
warning about an omitted enumeration code even if there is a
@code{default} label.

@item -Wsystem-headers
@opindex Wsystem-headers
@opindex Wno-system-headers
@cindex warnings from system headers
@cindex system headers, warnings from
Print warning messages for constructs found in system header files.
Warnings from system headers are normally suppressed, on the assumption
that they usually do not indicate real problems and would only make the
compiler output harder to read.  Using this command-line option tells
LLVM to emit warnings from system headers as if they occurred in user
code.  However, note that using @option{-Wall} in conjunction with this
option does @emph{not} warn about unknown pragmas in system
headers---for that, @option{-Wunknown-pragmas} must also be used.

@item -Wtrigraphs
@opindex Wtrigraphs
@opindex Wno-trigraphs
Warn if any trigraphs are encountered that might change the meaning of
the program (trigraphs within comments are not warned about).
This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wtype-limits
@opindex Wtype-limits
@opindex Wno-type-limits
Warn if a comparison is always true or always false due to the limited
range of the data type, but do not warn for constant expressions.  For
example, warn if an unsigned variable is compared against zero with
@code{<} or @code{>=}.  This warning is also enabled by
@option{-Wextra}.

@item -Wuninitialized
@opindex Wuninitialized
@opindex Wno-uninitialized
Warn if an automatic variable is used without first being initialized
or if a variable may be clobbered by a @code{setjmp} call. In C++,
warn if a non-static reference or non-static @code{const} member
appears in a class without constructors.

If you want to warn about code that uses the uninitialized value of the
variable in its own initializer, use the @option{-Winit-self} option.

These warnings occur for individual uninitialized or clobbered
elements of structure, union or array variables as well as for
variables that are uninitialized or clobbered as a whole.  They do
not occur for variables or elements declared @code{volatile}.  Because
these warnings depend on optimization, the exact variables or elements
for which there are warnings depends on the precise optimization
options and version of LLVM used.

Note that there may be no warning about a variable that is used only
to compute a value that itself is never used, because such
computations may be deleted by data flow analysis before the warnings
are printed.

@item -Wunknown-pragmas
@opindex Wunknown-pragmas
@opindex Wno-unknown-pragmas
@cindex warning for unknown pragmas
@cindex unknown pragmas, warning
@cindex pragmas, warning of unknown
Warn when a @code{#pragma} directive is encountered that is not understood by
LLVM@.  If this command-line option is used, warnings are even issued
for unknown pragmas in system header files.  This is not the case if
the warnings are only enabled by the @option{-Wall} command-line option.

@item -Wunused
@opindex Wunused
@opindex Wno-unused
All the following @option{-Wunused} options combined.

In order to get a warning about an unused function parameter, you must
either specify @option{-Wextra -Wunused} (note that @option{-Wall} implies
@option{-Wunused}), or separately specify @option{-Wunused-parameter}.

@item -Wunused-function
@opindex Wunused-function
@opindex Wno-unused-function
Warn whenever a static function is declared but not defined or a
non-inline static function is unused.
This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wunused-label
@opindex Wunused-label
@opindex Wno-unused-label
Warn whenever a label is declared but not used.
This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

To suppress this warning use the @code{unused} attribute
(@pxref{Variable Attributes}).

@item -Wunused-parameter
@opindex Wunused-parameter
@opindex Wno-unused-parameter
Warn whenever a function parameter is unused aside from its declaration.

To suppress this warning use the @code{unused} attribute
(@pxref{Variable Attributes}).

@item -Wno-unused-result
@opindex Wunused-result
@opindex Wno-unused-result
Do not warn if a caller of a function marked with attribute
@code{warn_unused_result} (@pxref{Function Attributes}) does not use
its return value. The default is @option{-Wunused-result}.

@item -Wunused-variable
@opindex Wunused-variable
@opindex Wno-unused-variable
Warn whenever a local variable or non-constant static variable is unused
aside from its declaration.
This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

To suppress this warning use the @code{unused} attribute
(@pxref{Variable Attributes}).

@item -Wunused-value
@opindex Wunused-value
@opindex Wno-unused-value
Warn whenever a statement computes a result that is explicitly not
used. To suppress this warning cast the unused expression to
@code{void}. This includes an expression-statement or the left-hand
side of a comma expression that contains no side effects. For example,
an expression such as @code{x[i,j]} causes a warning, while
@code{x[(void)i,j]} does not.

This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wvarargs
@opindex Wvarargs
@opindex Wno-varargs
Warn upon questionable usage of the macros used to handle variable
arguments like @code{va_start}.  This is default.  To inhibit the
warning messages, use @option{-Wno-varargs}.

@item -Wvariadic-macros
@opindex Wvariadic-macros
@opindex Wno-variadic-macros
Warn if variadic macros are used in ISO C90 mode, or if the GNU
alternate syntax is used in ISO C99 mode.  This is enabled by either
@option{-Wpedantic} or @option{-Wtraditional}.  To inhibit the warning
messages, use @option{-Wno-variadic-macros}.

@item -Wvla
@opindex Wvla
@opindex Wno-vla
Warn if variable length array is used in the code.
@option{-Wno-vla} prevents the @option{-Wpedantic} warning of
the variable length array.

@emph{Note:}  It is not clear why this is accepted by Clang/LLVM,
given the explicit rejection of variable length arrays.  It is highly
unlikely this option does anything.

@item -Wvolatile-register-var
@opindex Wvolatile-register-var
@opindex Wno-volatile-register-var
Warn if a register variable is declared volatile.  The volatile
modifier does not inhibit all optimizations that may eliminate reads
and/or writes to register variables.  This warning is enabled by
@option{-Wall}.

@item -Wwrite-strings
@opindex Wwrite-strings
@opindex Wno-write-strings
When compiling C, give string constants the type @code{const
char[@var{length}]} so that copying the address of one into a
non-@code{const} @code{char *} pointer produces a warning.  These
warnings help you find at compile time code that can try to write
into a string constant, but only if you have been very careful about
using @code{const} in declarations and prototypes.  Otherwise, it is
just a nuisance. This is why we did not make @option{-Wall} request
these warnings.

When compiling C++, warn about the deprecated conversion from string
literals to @code{char *}.  This warning is enabled by default for C++
programs.

@item -Wno-endif-labels
@xref{op Wno-endif-labels,, -Wundef}.

@item -Wundef
@xref{op Wundef,, -Wundef}.

@item -Winit-self @r{(C, C++, Objective-C and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Winit-self
@opindex Wno-init-self
Warn about uninitialized variables that are initialized with themselves.
Note this option can only be used with the @option{-Wuninitialized} option.

For example, LLVM warns about @code{i} being uninitialized in the
following snippet only when @option{-Winit-self} has been specified:
@smallexample
@group
int f()
@{
  int i = i;
  return i;
@}
@end group
@end smallexample

This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall} in C++.

@item -Wmissing-declarations @r{(C, C++, Objective-C and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wmissing-declarations
@opindex Wno-missing-declarations
Warn if a global function is defined without a previous declaration.
Do so even if the definition itself provides a prototype.
Use this option to detect global functions that are not declared in
header files.  In C, no warnings are issued for functions with previous
non-prototype declarations; use @option{-Wmissing-prototypes} to detect
missing prototypes.  In C++, no warnings are issued for function templates,
or for inline functions, or for functions in anonymous namespaces.

@item -Wmissing-include-dirs @r{(C, C++, Objective-C and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wmissing-include-dirs
@opindex Wno-missing-include-dirs
Warn if a user-supplied include directory does not exist.

@item -Wbad-function-cast @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wbad-function-cast
@opindex Wno-bad-function-cast
Warn when a function call is cast to a non-matching type.
For example, warn if a call to a function returning an integer type
is cast to a pointer type.

@item -Wc++-compat @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wc++-compat
Warn about ISO C constructs that are outside of the common subset of
ISO C and ISO C++, e.g.@: request for implicit conversion from
@code{void *} to a pointer to non-@code{void} type.

@item -Wdeclaration-after-statement @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wdeclaration-after-statement
@opindex Wno-declaration-after-statement
Warn when a declaration is found after a statement in a block.  This
construct, known from C++, was introduced with ISO C99 and is by default
allowed in LLVM@.  It is not supported by ISO C90.  @xref{Mixed Declarations}.

@item -Wignored-qualifiers @r{(C and C++ only)}
@opindex Wignored-qualifiers
@opindex Wno-ignored-qualifiers
Warn if the return type of a function has a type qualifier
such as @code{const}.  For ISO C such a type qualifier has no effect,
since the value returned by a function is not an lvalue.
For C++, the warning is only emitted for scalar types or @code{void}.
ISO C prohibits qualified @code{void} return types on function
definitions, so such return types always receive a warning
even without this option.

This warning is also enabled by @option{-Wextra}.

@item -Wimplicit @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wimplicit
@opindex Wno-implicit
Same as @option{-Wimplicit-int} and @option{-Wimplicit-function-declaration}.
This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wimplicit-function-declaration @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wimplicit-function-declaration
@opindex Wno-implicit-function-declaration
Give a warning whenever a function is used before being declared. In
C99 mode (@option{-std=c99} or @option{-std=gnu99}), this warning is
enabled by default and it is made into an error by
@option{-pedantic-errors}. This warning is also enabled by
@option{-Wall}.

@item -Wimplicit-int @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wimplicit-int
@opindex Wno-implicit-int
Warn when a declaration does not specify a type.
This warning is enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wno-incompatible-pointer-types @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wno-incompatible-pointer-types
@opindex Wincompatible-pointer-types
Do not warn when there is a conversion between pointers that have incompatible
types.  This warning is for cases not covered by @option{-Wno-pointer-sign},
which warns for pointer argument passing or assignment with different
signedness.

@item -Wno-int-conversion @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wno-int-conversion
@opindex Wint-conversion
Do not warn about incompatible integer to pointer and pointer to integer
conversions.  This warning is about implicit conversions; for explicit
conversions the warnings @option{-Wno-int-to-pointer-cast} and
@option{-Wno-pointer-to-int-cast} may be used.

@item -Wmissing-prototypes @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wmissing-prototypes
@opindex Wno-missing-prototypes
Warn if a global function is defined without a previous prototype
declaration.  This warning is issued even if the definition itself
provides a prototype.  Use this option to detect global functions
that do not have a matching prototype declaration in a header file.
This option is not valid for C++ because all function declarations
provide prototypes and a non-matching declaration declares an
overload rather than conflict with an earlier declaration.
Use @option{-Wmissing-declarations} to detect missing declarations in C++.

@item -Wnested-externs @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wnested-externs
@opindex Wno-nested-externs
Warn if an @code{extern} declaration is encountered within a function.

@item -Wpointer-sign @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wpointer-sign
@opindex Wno-pointer-sign
Warn for pointer argument passing or assignment with different signedness.
This option is only supported for C and Objective-C@.  It is implied by
@option{-Wall} and by @option{-Wpedantic}, which can be disabled with
@option{-Wno-pointer-sign}.

@item -Wno-pointer-to-int-cast @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wno-pointer-to-int-cast
@opindex Wpointer-to-int-cast
Suppress warnings from casts from a pointer to an integer type of a
different size.

@item -Wstrict-prototypes @r{(C and Objective-C only)}
@opindex Wstrict-prototypes
@opindex Wno-strict-prototypes
Warn if a function is declared or defined without specifying the
argument types.  (An old-style function definition is permitted without
a warning if preceded by a declaration that specifies the argument
types.)

@item -Wc++11-compat @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wc++11-compat
Warn about C++ constructs whose meaning differs between ISO C++ 1998
and ISO C++ 2011, e.g., identifiers in ISO C++ 1998 that are keywords
in ISO C++ 2011.  This warning turns on @option{-Wnarrowing} and is
enabled by @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wno-conversion-null @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wconversion-null
@opindex Wno-conversion-null
Do not warn for conversions between @code{NULL} and non-pointer
types. @option{-Wconversion-null} is enabled by default.

@item -Wdelete-incomplete @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wdelete-incomplete
@opindex Wno-delete-incomplete
Warn when deleting a pointer to incomplete type, which may cause
undefined behavior at runtime.  This warning is enabled by default.

@item -Wno-inherited-variadic-ctor @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Winherited-variadic-ctor
@opindex Wno-inherited-variadic-ctor
Suppress warnings about use of C++11 inheriting constructors when the
base class inherited from has a C variadic constructor; the warning is
on by default because the ellipsis is not inherited.

@item -Wuseless-cast @r{(C++ and Objective-C++ only)}
@opindex Wuseless-cast
@opindex Wno-useless-cast
Warn when an expression is casted to its own type.

@end table

@node Debugging Options
@section Options for Debugging Your Program or LLVM
@cindex options, debugging
@cindex debugging information options

Clang/LLVM has various special options that are used for debugging either
your program or LLVM:

The following GCC options for debugging are not supported by
Clang/LLVM:
@gccoptlist{-d@var{letter}  -fasan-shadow-offset=1  -fcheck-pointer-bounds @gol
-fchkp-check-incomplete-type  -fchkp-check-read  -fchkp-check-write @gol
-fchkp-first-field-has-own-bounds  -fchkp-instrument-calls @gol
-fchkp-instrument-marked-only  -fchkp-narrow-bounds @gol
-fchkp-narrow-to-innermost-array  -fchkp-optimize  -fchkp-store-bounds @gol
-fchkp-treat-zero-dynamic-size-as-infinite @gol
-fchkp-use-fast-string-functions  -fchkp-use-nochk-string-functions @gol
-fchkp-use-static-bounds  -fchkp-use-static-const-bounds @gol
-fchkp-use-wrappers  -fcompare-debug@r{[}=@var{opts}@r{]} @gol
-fcompare-debug-second  -fdbg-cnt=@var{counter-value-list} @gol
-fdbg-cnt-list  -fdebug-prefix-map=@var{old}=@var{new} @gol
-fdisable-@var{kind}-@var{pass}=@var{range-list}  -fdump-class-hierarchy @gol
-fdump-class-hierarchy-@var{options}  -fdump-final-insns @gol
-fdump-final-insns=@r{[}=@var{file}@r{]}  -fdump-ipa-@var{switch} @gol
-fdump-noaddr  -fdump-passes  -fdump-rtl-@var{pass} @gol
-fdump-statistics-@var{option}  -fdump-translation-unit @gol
-fdump-translation-unit-@var{options}  -fdump-tree-@var{switch} @gol
-fdump-unnumbered  -fdump-unnumbered-links  -feliminate-dwarf2-dups @gol
-femit-class-debug-always  -femit-struct-debug-baseonly @gol
-femit-struct-debug-detailed  -femit-struct-debug-reduced @gol
-fenable-@var{kind}-@var{pass}  -fmem-report  -fmem-report-wpa @gol
-fno-merge-debug-strings  -fopt-info  -fpost-ipa-mem-report @gol
-fpre-ipa-mem-report  -fprofile-report  -freport-bug @gol
-fsanitize-recover@r{[}=@var{opts}@r{]}  -fsched-verbose=@var{n} @gol
-fstack-usage  -fvar-tracking  -fvar-tracking-assignments @gol
-fvar-tracking-assignments-toggle  -gcoff  -gcoff0  -gcoff1  -gcoff2 @gol
-gcoff3  -gdwarf-5  -gpubnames  -gstabs  -gstabs+  -gstabs0  -gstabs1 @gol
-gstabs2  -gstabs3  -gtoggle  -gvms  -gvms0  -gvms1  -gvms2  -gvms3 @gol
-gxcoff  -gxcoff+  -gxcoff0  -gxcoff1  -gxcoff2  -gxcoff3  -gz @gol
-print-multiarch  -print-sysroot  -print-sysroot-headers-suffix}

The following GCC options are accepted by Clang/LLVM, but do nothing, and by
default will issue a warning message:
@gccoptlist{-feliminate-unused-debug-symbols  -p  -Q  -time}

The following GCC options are accepted by Clang/LLVM, but have
different behavior
@gccoptlist{-save-temps}

@table @gcctabopt
@item -g
@opindex g
Produce debugging information in the operating system's native format,
which is always DWARF for Clang/LLVM.  LLDB or GDB can work with this
debugging information.

Clang LLVM allows you to use @option{-g} with
@option{-O}.  The shortcuts taken by optimized code may occasionally
produce surprising results: some variables you declared may not exist
at all; flow of control may briefly move where you did not expect it;
some statements may not be executed because they compute constant
results or their values are already at hand; some statements may
execute in different places because they have been moved out of loops.

Nevertheless it proves possible to debug optimized output.  This makes
it reasonable to use the optimizer for programs that might have bugs.

The following options are useful for fine-grain control over the
debugging output.

@item -gsplit-dwarf
@opindex gsplit-dwarf
Separate as much dwarf debugging information as possible into a
separate output file with the extension .dwo.  This option allows
the build system to avoid linking files with debug information.  To
be useful, this option requires a debugger capable of reading .dwo
files.

@item -ggdb
@opindex ggdb
Produce debugging information for use by GDB@.  This means to use the
most expressive format available (DWARF 4), including GDB extensions
if at all possible.

@item -ggnu-pubnames
@opindex ggnu-pubnames
Generate .debug_pubnames and .debug_pubtypes sections in a format
suitable for conversion into a GDB@ index.  This option is only useful
with a linker that can produce GDB@ index version 7.

@item -fdebug-types-section
@opindex fdebug-types-section
@opindex fno-debug-types-section
When using DWARF Version 4 or higher, type DIEs can be put into
their own @code{.debug_types} section instead of making them part of the
@code{.debug_info} section.  It is more efficient to put them in a separate
comdat sections since the linker can then remove duplicates.
But not all DWARF consumers support @code{.debug_types} sections yet
and on some objects @code{.debug_types} produces larger instead of smaller
debugging information.

@item -gdwarf-@var{version}
@opindex gdwarf-@var{version}
Produce debugging information in DWARF format (if that is supported).
The value of @var{version} may be either 2, 3 or 4; the default version
for Clang/LLVM is 4.  Version 4 may require GDB 7.0 or later for
maximum benefit.

@emph{Note:} Unlike GDB, there is no experimental support for DWARF
version 5.

@item -grecord-gcc-switches
@opindex grecord-gcc-switches
This switch causes the command-line options used to invoke the
compiler that may affect code generation to be appended to the
DW_AT_producer attribute in DWARF debugging information.  The options
are concatenated with spaces separating them from each other and from
the compiler version.  See also @option{-frecord-gcc-switches} for another
way of storing compiler options into the object file.  This is the default.

@item -gno-record-gcc-switches
@opindex gno-record-gcc-switches
Disallow appending command-line options to the DW_AT_producer attribute
in DWARF debugging information.

@item -gstrict-dwarf
@opindex gstrict-dwarf
Disallow using extensions of later DWARF standard version than selected
with @option{-gdwarf-@var{version}}.  On most targets using non-conflicting
DWARF extensions from later standard versions is allowed.

@item -gno-strict-dwarf
@opindex gno-strict-dwarf
Allow using extensions of later DWARF standard version than selected with
@option{-gdwarf-@var{version}}.

@item -g@var{level}
@itemx -ggdb@var{level}
Request debugging information and also use @var{level} to specify how
much information.  The default level is 2.

Level 0 produces no debug information at all.  Thus, @option{-g0} negates
@option{-g}.

Level 1 produces minimal information, enough for making backtraces in
parts of the program that you don't plan to debug.  This includes
descriptions of functions and external variables, and line number
tables, but no information about local variables.

Level 3 includes extra information, such as all the macro definitions
present in the program.  Some debuggers support macro expansion when
you use @option{-g3}.

@option{-gdwarf-2} does not accept a concatenated debug level, because
GCC used to support an option @option{-gdwarf} that meant to generate
debug information in version 1 of the DWARF format (which is very
different from version 2), and it would have been too confusing.  That
debug format is long obsolete, but the option cannot be changed now.
Instead use an additional @option{-g@var{level}} option to change the
debug level for DWARF.

@item -fsanitize=address
@opindex fsanitize=address
Enable AddressSanitizer, a fast memory error detector.
Memory access instructions are instrumented to detect
out-of-bounds and use-after-free bugs.
See @uref{http://code.google.com/p/address-sanitizer/} for
more details.  The run-time behavior can be influenced using the
@env{ASAN_OPTIONS} environment variable; see
@url{https://code.google.com/p/address-sanitizer/wiki/Flags#Run-time_flags} for
a list of supported options.

@item -fsanitize=kernel-address
@opindex fsanitize=kernel-address
Enable AddressSanitizer for Linux kernel.
See @uref{http://code.google.com/p/address-sanitizer/wiki/AddressSanitizerForKernel} for more details.

@item -fsanitize=thread
@opindex fsanitize=thread
Enable ThreadSanitizer, a fast data race detector.
Memory access instructions are instrumented to detect
data race bugs.  See @uref{http://code.google.com/p/thread-sanitizer/} for more
details. The run-time behavior can be influenced using the @env{TSAN_OPTIONS}
environment variable; see
@url{https://code.google.com/p/thread-sanitizer/wiki/Flags} for a list of
supported options.

@item -fsanitize=leak
@opindex fsanitize=leak
Enable LeakSanitizer, a memory leak detector.
This option only matters for linking of executables and if neither
@option{-fsanitize=address} nor @option{-fsanitize=thread} is used.  In that
case the executable is linked against a library that overrides @code{malloc}
and other allocator functions.  See
@uref{https://code.google.com/p/address-sanitizer/wiki/LeakSanitizer} for more
details.  The run-time behavior can be influenced using the
@env{LSAN_OPTIONS} environment variable.

@item -fsanitize=undefined
@opindex fsanitize=undefined
Enable UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer, a fast undefined behavior detector.
Various computations are instrumented to detect undefined behavior
at runtime.  Current suboptions are:

@table @gcctabopt

@item -fsanitize=shift
@opindex fsanitize=shift
This option enables checking that the result of a shift operation is
not undefined.  Note that what exactly is considered undefined differs
slightly between C and C++, as well as between ISO C90 and C99, etc.

@item -fsanitize=integer-divide-by-zero
@opindex fsanitize=integer-divide-by-zero
Detect integer division by zero as well as @code{INT_MIN / -1} division.

@item -fsanitize=unreachable
@opindex fsanitize=unreachable
With this option, the compiler turns the @code{__builtin_unreachable}
call into a diagnostics message call instead.  When reaching the
@code{__builtin_unreachable} call, the behavior is undefined.

@item -fsanitize=vla-bound
@opindex fsanitize=vla-bound
This option instructs the compiler to check that the size of a variable
length array is positive.

@item -fsanitize=null
@opindex fsanitize=null
This option enables pointer checking.  Particularly, the application
built with this option turned on will issue an error message when it
tries to dereference a NULL pointer, or if a reference (possibly an
rvalue reference) is bound to a NULL pointer, or if a method is invoked
on an object pointed by a NULL pointer.

@item -fsanitize=return
@opindex fsanitize=return
This option enables return statement checking.  Programs
built with this option turned on will issue an error message
when the end of a non-void function is reached without actually
returning a value.  This option works in C++ only.

@item -fsanitize=signed-integer-overflow
@opindex fsanitize=signed-integer-overflow
This option enables signed integer overflow checking.  We check that
the result of @code{+}, @code{*}, and both unary and binary @code{-}
does not overflow in the signed arithmetics.  Note, integer promotion
rules must be taken into account.  That is, the following is not an
overflow:
@smallexample
signed char a = SCHAR_MAX;
a++;
@end smallexample

@item -fsanitize=bounds
@opindex fsanitize=bounds
This option enables instrumentation of array bounds.  Various out of bounds
accesses are detected.  Flexible array members, flexible array member-like
arrays, and initializers of variables with static storage are not instrumented.

@item -fsanitize=alignment
@opindex fsanitize=alignment

This option enables checking of alignment of pointers when they are
dereferenced, or when a reference is bound to insufficiently aligned target,
or when a method or constructor is invoked on insufficiently aligned object.

@item -fsanitize=object-size
@opindex fsanitize=object-size
This option enables instrumentation of memory references using the
@code{__builtin_object_size} function.  Various out of bounds pointer
accesses are detected.

@item -fsanitize=float-divide-by-zero
@opindex fsanitize=float-divide-by-zero
Detect floating-point division by zero.  Unlike other similar options,
@option{-fsanitize=float-divide-by-zero} is not enabled by
@option{-fsanitize=undefined}, since floating-point division by zero can
be a legitimate way of obtaining infinities and NaNs.

@item -fsanitize=float-cast-overflow
@opindex fsanitize=float-cast-overflow
This option enables floating-point type to integer conversion checking.
We check that the result of the conversion does not overflow.
Unlike other similar options, @option{-fsanitize=float-cast-overflow} is
not enabled by @option{-fsanitize=undefined}.
This option does not work well with @code{FE_INVALID} exceptions enabled.

@item -fsanitize=nonnull-attribute
@opindex fsanitize=nonnull-attribute

This option enables instrumentation of calls, checking whether null values
are not passed to arguments marked as requiring a non-null value by the
@code{nonnull} function attribute.

@item -fsanitize=returns-nonnull-attribute
@opindex fsanitize=returns-nonnull-attribute

This option enables instrumentation of return statements in functions
marked with @code{returns_nonnull} function attribute, to detect returning
of null values from such functions.

@item -fsanitize=bool
@opindex fsanitize=bool

This option enables instrumentation of loads from bool.  If a value other
than 0/1 is loaded, a run-time error is issued.

@item -fsanitize=enum
@opindex fsanitize=enum

This option enables instrumentation of loads from an enum type.  If
a value outside the range of values for the enum type is loaded,
a run-time error is issued.

@item -fsanitize=vptr
@opindex fsanitize=vptr

This option enables instrumentation of C++ member function calls, member
accesses and some conversions between pointers to base and derived classes,
to verify the referenced object has the correct dynamic type.

@end table

While @option{-ftrapv} causes traps for signed overflows to be emitted,
@option{-fsanitize=undefined} gives a diagnostic message.
This currently works only for the C family of languages.

@item -fno-sanitize=all
@opindex fno-sanitize=all

This option disables all previously enabled sanitizers.
@option{-fsanitize=all} is not allowed, as some sanitizers cannot be used
together.

@item -fsanitize-undefined-trap-on-error
@opindex fsanitize-undefined-trap-on-error
The @option{-fsanitize-undefined-trap-on-error} instructs the compiler to
report undefined behavior using @code{__builtin_trap} rather than
a @code{libubsan} library routine.  The advantage of this is that the
@code{libubsan} library is not needed and is not linked in, so this
is usable even in freestanding environments.

@item -fdebug-prefix-map=@var{old}=@var{new}
@opindex fdebug-prefix-map
When compiling files in directory @file{@var{old}}, record debugging
information describing them as in @file{@var{new}} instead.

@item -fno-dwarf2-cfi-asm
@opindex fdwarf2-cfi-asm
@opindex fno-dwarf2-cfi-asm
Emit DWARF 2 unwind info as compiler generated @code{.eh_frame} section
instead of using GAS @code{.cfi_*} directives.

@cindex @command{gprof}
@item -pg
@opindex pg
Generate extra code to write profile information suitable for the
analysis program @command{gprof}.  You must use this option when compiling
the source files you want data about, and you must also use it when
linking.

@item -ftime-report
@opindex ftime-report
Makes the compiler print some statistics about the time consumed by each
pass when it finishes.

@item -fmem-report
@opindex fmem-report
Makes the compiler print some statistics about permanent memory
allocation when it finishes.

@item -fmem-report-wpa
@opindex fmem-report-wpa
Makes the compiler print some statistics about permanent memory
allocation for the WPA phase only.

@item -fprofile-arcs
@opindex fprofile-arcs
Add code so that program flow @dfn{arcs} are instrumented.  During
execution the program records how many times each branch and call is
executed and how many times it is taken or returns.  When the compiled
program exits it saves this data to a file called
@file{@var{auxname}.gcda} for each source file.  The data may be used for
profile-directed optimizations (@option{-fbranch-probabilities}), or for
test coverage analysis (@option{-ftest-coverage}).  Each object file's
@var{auxname} is generated from the name of the output file, if
explicitly specified and it is not the final executable, otherwise it is
the basename of the source file.  In both cases any suffix is removed
(e.g.@: @file{foo.gcda} for input file @file{dir/foo.c}, or
@file{dir/foo.gcda} for output file specified as @option{-o dir/foo.o}).

@cindex @command{gcov}
@item --coverage
@opindex coverage

This option is used to compile and link code instrumented for coverage
analysis.  The option is a synonym for @option{-fprofile-arcs}
@option{-ftest-coverage} (when compiling) and @option{-lgcov} (when
linking).  See the documentation for those options for more details.

@itemize

@item
Compile the source files with @option{-fprofile-arcs} plus optimization
and code generation options.  For test coverage analysis, use the
additional @option{-ftest-coverage} option.  You do not need to profile
every source file in a program.

@item
Link your object files with @option{-lgcov} or @option{-fprofile-arcs}
(the latter implies the former).

@item
Run the program on a representative workload to generate the arc profile
information.  This may be repeated any number of times.  You can run
concurrent instances of your program, and provided that the file system
supports locking, the data files will be correctly updated.  Also
@code{fork} calls are detected and correctly handled (double counting
will not happen).

@item
For profile-directed optimizations, compile the source files again with
the same optimization and code generation options plus
@option{-fbranch-probabilities} (@pxref{Optimize Options,,Options that
Control Optimization}).

@item
For test coverage analysis, use @command{gcov} to produce human readable
information from the @file{.gcno} and @file{.gcda} files.  Refer to the
@command{gcov} documentation for further information.

@end itemize

With @option{-fprofile-arcs}, for each function of your program LLVM
creates a program flow graph, then finds a spanning tree for the graph.
Only arcs that are not on the spanning tree have to be instrumented: the
compiler adds code to count the number of times that these arcs are
executed.  When an arc is the only exit or only entrance to a block, the
instrumentation code can be added to the block; otherwise, a new basic
block must be created to hold the instrumentation code.

@need 2000
@item -ftest-coverage
@opindex ftest-coverage
Produce a notes file that the @command{gcov} code-coverage utility can
use to show program coverage.  Each source file's note file is called
@file{@var{auxname}.gcno}.  Refer to the @option{-fprofile-arcs}
option above for a description of @var{auxname} and instructions on
how to generate test coverage data.  Coverage data matches the source
files more closely if you do not optimize.

@item -frandom-seed=@var{number}
@opindex frandom-seed
This option provides a seed that LLVM uses in place of
random numbers in generating certain symbol names
that have to be different in every compiled file.  It is also used to
place unique stamps in coverage data files and the object files that
produce them.  You can use the @option{-frandom-seed} option to produce
reproducibly identical object files.

The @var{number} should be different for every file you compile.

@item -save-temps
@opindex save-temps
Store the usual ``temporary'' intermediate files permanently; place them
in the current directory and name them based on the source file.  Thus,
compiling @file{foo.c} with @option{-c -save-temps} produces files
@file{foo.i} and @file{foo.s}, as well as @file{foo.o}.  This creates a
preprocessed @file{foo.i} output file even though the compiler now
normally uses an integrated preprocessor.

When used in combination with the @option{-x} command-line option,
@option{-save-temps} is sensible enough to avoid over writing an
input source file with the same extension as an intermediate file.
The corresponding intermediate file may be obtained by renaming the
source file before using @option{-save-temps}.

If you invoke Clang/LLVM in parallel, compiling several different source
files that share a common base name in different subdirectories or the
same source file compiled for multiple output destinations, it is
likely that the different parallel compilers will interfere with each
other, and overwrite the temporary files.  For instance:

@smallexample
clang -save-temps -o outdir1/foo.o indir1/foo.c&
clang -save-temps -o outdir2/foo.o indir2/foo.c&
@end smallexample

may result in @file{foo.i} and @file{foo.o} being written to
simultaneously by both compilers.

@emph{Note:} The GCC variants of @option{-save-temps=cwd} and
@option{save-temps=obj} are not supported by Clang/LLVM.

@item -print-file-name=@var{library}
@opindex print-file-name
Print the full absolute name of the library file @var{library} that
would be used when linking---and don't do anything else.  With this
option, LLVM does not compile or link anything; it just prints the
file name.

@item -print-multi-directory
@opindex print-multi-directory
Print the directory name corresponding to the multilib selected by any
other switches present in the command line.  This directory is supposed
to exist in @env{GCC_EXEC_PREFIX}.

@item -print-multi-lib
@opindex print-multi-lib
Print the mapping from multilib directory names to compiler switches
that enable them.  The directory name is separated from the switches by
@samp{;}, and each switch starts with an @samp{@@} instead of the
@samp{-}, without spaces between multiple switches.  This is supposed to
ease shell processing.

@item -print-multi-os-directory
@opindex print-multi-os-directory
Print the path to OS libraries for the selected
multilib, relative to some @file{lib} subdirectory.  If OS libraries are
present in the @file{lib} subdirectory and no multilibs are used, this is
usually just @file{.}, if OS libraries are present in @file{lib@var{suffix}}
sibling directories this prints e.g.@: @file{../lib64}, @file{../lib} or
@file{../lib32}, or if OS libraries are present in @file{lib/@var{subdir}}
subdirectories it prints e.g.@: @file{amd64}, @file{sparcv9} or @file{ev6}.

@item -print-prog-name=@var{program}
@opindex print-prog-name
Like @option{-print-file-name}, but searches for a program such as @command{cpp}.

@item -print-libgcc-file-name
@opindex print-libgcc-file-name
Same as @option{-print-file-name=libgcc.a}.

This is useful when you use @option{-nostdlib} or @option{-nodefaultlibs}
but you do want to link with @file{libgcc.a}.  You can do:

@smallexample
clang -nostdlib @var{files}@dots{} `gcc -print-libgcc-file-name`
@end smallexample

@item -print-search-dirs
@opindex print-search-dirs
Print the name of the configured installation directory and a list of
program and library directories @command{clang} searches---and don't do anything else.

This is useful when @command{clang} prints the error message
@samp{installation problem, cannot exec cpp0: No such file or directory}.
To resolve this you either need to put @file{cpp0} and the other compiler
components where @command{clang} expects to find them, or you can set the environment
variable @env{GCC_EXEC_PREFIX} to the directory where you installed them.
Don't forget the trailing @samp{/}.
@xref{Environment Variables}.

@item -dumpmachine
@opindex dumpmachine
Print the compiler's target machine (for example,
@samp{i686-pc-linux-gnu})---and don't do anything else.

@item -dumpversion
@opindex dumpversion
Print the compiler version (for example, @code{3.0})---and don't do
anything else.

@item -dumpspecs
@opindex dumpspecs
Print the compiler's built-in specs---and don't do anything else.  (This
is used when LLVM itself is being built.)  @xref{Spec Files}.

@item -fno-eliminate-unused-debug-types
@opindex feliminate-unused-debug-types
@opindex fno-eliminate-unused-debug-types
Normally, when producing DWARF 2 output, LLVM avoids producing debug symbol
output for types that are nowhere used in the source file being compiled.
Sometimes it is useful to have LLVM emit debugging
information for all types declared in a compilation
unit, regardless of whether or not they are actually used
in that compilation unit, for example
if, in the debugger, you want to cast a value to a type that is
not actually used in your program (but is declared).  More often,
however, this results in a significant amount of wasted space.
@end table

@node Optimize Options
@section Options That Control Optimization
@cindex optimize options
@cindex options, optimization

These options control various sorts of optimizations.

Without any optimization option, the compiler's goal is to reduce the
cost of compilation and to make debugging produce the expected
results.  Statements are independent: if you stop the program with a
breakpoint between statements, you can then assign a new value to any
variable or change the program counter to any other statement in the
function and get exactly the results you expect from the source
code.

Turning on optimization flags makes the compiler attempt to improve
the performance and/or code size at the expense of compilation time
and possibly the ability to debug the program.

The compiler performs optimization based on the knowledge it has of the
program.  Compiling multiple files at once to a single output file mode allows
the compiler to use information gained from all of the files when compiling
each of them.

Not all optimizations are controlled directly by a flag.  Only
optimizations that have a flag are listed in this section.

Most optimizations are only enabled if an @option{-O} level is set on
the command line.  Otherwise they are disabled, even if individual
optimization flags are specified.

Depending on the target and how LLVM was configured, a slightly different
set of optimizations may be enabled at each @option{-O} level than
those listed here.  You can invoke LLVM with @option{-Q --help=optimizers}
to find out the exact set of optimizations that are enabled at each level.
@xref{Overall Options}, for examples.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -O
@itemx -O1
@opindex O
@opindex O1
Optimize.  Optimizing compilation takes somewhat more time, and a lot
more memory for a large function.

With @option{-O}, the compiler tries to reduce code size and execution
time, without performing any optimizations that take a great deal of
compilation time.

@option{-O} turns on the following optimization flags:
@gccoptlist{
-fauto-inc-dec @gol
-fbranch-count-reg @gol
-fcombine-stack-adjustments @gol
-fcompare-elim @gol
-fcprop-registers @gol
-fdce @gol
-fdefer-pop @gol
-fdelayed-branch @gol
-fdse @gol
-fforward-propagate @gol
-fguess-branch-probability @gol
-fif-conversion2 @gol
-fif-conversion @gol
-finline-functions-called-once @gol
-fipa-pure-const @gol
-fipa-profile @gol
-fipa-reference @gol
-fmerge-constants @gol
-fmove-loop-invariants @gol
-fshrink-wrap @gol
-fsplit-wide-types @gol
-ftree-bit-ccp @gol
-ftree-ccp @gol
-fssa-phiopt @gol
-ftree-ch @gol
-ftree-copy-prop @gol
-ftree-copyrename @gol
-ftree-dce @gol
-ftree-dominator-opts @gol
-ftree-dse @gol
-ftree-forwprop @gol
-ftree-fre @gol
-ftree-phiprop @gol
-ftree-sink @gol
-ftree-slsr @gol
-ftree-sra @gol
-ftree-pta @gol
-ftree-ter @gol
-funit-at-a-time}

@option{-O} also turns on @option{-fomit-frame-pointer} on machines
where doing so does not interfere with debugging.

@item -O2
@opindex O2
Optimize even more.  LLVM performs nearly all supported optimizations
that do not involve a space-speed tradeoff.
As compared to @option{-O}, this option increases both compilation time
and the performance of the generated code.

@option{-O2} turns on all optimization flags specified by @option{-O}.  It
also turns on the following optimization flags:
@gccoptlist{-fthread-jumps @gol
-falign-functions  -falign-jumps @gol
-falign-loops  -falign-labels @gol
-fcaller-saves @gol
-fcrossjumping @gol
-fcse-follow-jumps  -fcse-skip-blocks @gol
-fdelete-null-pointer-checks @gol
-fdevirtualize -fdevirtualize-speculatively @gol
-fexpensive-optimizations @gol
-fgcse  -fgcse-lm  @gol
-fhoist-adjacent-loads @gol
-finline-small-functions @gol
-findirect-inlining @gol
-fipa-cp @gol
-fipa-cp-alignment @gol
-fipa-sra @gol
-fipa-icf @gol
-fisolate-erroneous-paths-dereference @gol
-flra-remat @gol
-foptimize-sibling-calls @gol
-foptimize-strlen @gol
-fpartial-inlining @gol
-fpeephole2 @gol
-freorder-blocks -freorder-blocks-and-partition -freorder-functions @gol
-frerun-cse-after-loop  @gol
-fsched-interblock  -fsched-spec @gol
-fschedule-insns  -fschedule-insns2 @gol
-fstrict-aliasing -fstrict-overflow @gol
-ftree-builtin-call-dce @gol
-ftree-switch-conversion -ftree-tail-merge @gol
-ftree-pre @gol
-ftree-vrp @gol
-fipa-ra}

Please note the warning under @option{-fgcse} about
invoking @option{-O2} on programs that use computed gotos.

@item -O3
@opindex O3
Optimize yet more.  @option{-O3} turns on all optimizations specified
by @option{-O2} and also turns on the @option{-finline-functions},
@option{-funswitch-loops}, @option{-fpredictive-commoning},
@option{-fgcse-after-reload}, @option{-ftree-loop-vectorize},
@option{-ftree-loop-distribute-patterns},
@option{-ftree-slp-vectorize}, @option{-fvect-cost-model},
@option{-ftree-partial-pre} and @option{-fipa-cp-clone} options.

@item -O0
@opindex O0
Reduce compilation time and make debugging produce the expected
results.  This is the default.

@item -Os
@opindex Os
Optimize for size.  @option{-Os} enables all @option{-O2} optimizations that
do not typically increase code size.  It also performs further
optimizations designed to reduce code size.

@option{-Os} disables the following optimization flags:
@gccoptlist{-falign-functions  -falign-jumps  -falign-loops @gol
-falign-labels  -freorder-blocks  -freorder-blocks-and-partition @gol
-fprefetch-loop-arrays}

@item -Ofast
@opindex Ofast
Disregard strict standards compliance.  @option{-Ofast} enables all
@option{-O3} optimizations.  It also enables optimizations that are not
valid for all standard-compliant programs.
It turns on @option{-ffast-math} and the Fortran-specific
@option{-fno-protect-parens} and @option{-fstack-arrays}.

@item -Og
@opindex Og
Optimize debugging experience.  @option{-Og} enables optimizations
that do not interfere with debugging. It should be the optimization
level of choice for the standard edit-compile-debug cycle, offering
a reasonable level of optimization while maintaining fast compilation
and a good debugging experience.

If you use multiple @option{-O} options, with or without level numbers,
the last such option is the one that is effective.
@end table

Options of the form @option{-f@var{flag}} specify machine-independent
flags.  Most flags have both positive and negative forms; the negative
form of @option{-ffoo} is @option{-fno-foo}.  In the table
below, only one of the forms is listed---the one you typically
use.  You can figure out the other form by either removing @samp{no-}
or adding it.

The following options control specific optimizations.  They are either
activated by @option{-O} options or are related to ones that are.  You
can use the following flags in the rare cases when ``fine-tuning'' of
optimizations to be performed is desired.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -fno-defer-pop
@opindex fno-defer-pop
Always pop the arguments to each function call as soon as that function
returns.  For machines that must pop arguments after a function call,
the compiler normally lets arguments accumulate on the stack for several
function calls and pops them all at once.

Disabled at levels @option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fforward-propagate
@opindex fforward-propagate
Perform a forward propagation pass on RTL@.  The pass tries to combine two
instructions and checks if the result can be simplified.  If loop unrolling
is active, two passes are performed and the second is scheduled after
loop unrolling.

This option is enabled by default at optimization levels @option{-O},
@option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -ffp-contract=@var{style}
@opindex ffp-contract
@option{-ffp-contract=off} disables floating-point expression contraction.
@option{-ffp-contract=fast} enables floating-point expression contraction
such as forming of fused multiply-add operations if the target has
native support for them.
@option{-ffp-contract=on} enables floating-point expression contraction
if allowed by the language standard.  This is currently not implemented
and treated equal to @option{-ffp-contract=off}.

The default is @option{-ffp-contract=fast}.

@item -fomit-frame-pointer
@opindex fomit-frame-pointer
Don't keep the frame pointer in a register for functions that
don't need one.  This avoids the instructions to save, set up and
restore frame pointers; it also makes an extra register available
in many functions.  @strong{It also makes debugging impossible on
some machines.}

On some machines, such as the VAX, this flag has no effect, because
the standard calling sequence automatically handles the frame pointer
and nothing is saved by pretending it doesn't exist.  The
machine-description macro @code{FRAME_POINTER_REQUIRED} controls
whether a target machine supports this flag.  @xref{Registers,,Register
Usage, gccint, GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) Internals}.

The default setting (when not optimizing for
size) for 32-bit GNU/Linux x86 and 32-bit Darwin x86 targets is
@option{-fomit-frame-pointer}.  You can configure LLVM with the
@option{--enable-frame-pointer} configure option to change the default.

Enabled at levels @option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -foptimize-sibling-calls
@opindex foptimize-sibling-calls
Optimize sibling and tail recursive calls.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -foptimize-strlen
@opindex foptimize-strlen
Optimize various standard C string functions (e.g. @code{strlen},
@code{strchr} or @code{strcpy}) and
their @code{_FORTIFY_SOURCE} counterparts into faster alternatives.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}.

@item -fno-inline
@opindex fno-inline
Do not expand any functions inline apart from those marked with
the @code{always_inline} attribute.  This is the default when not
optimizing.

Single functions can be exempted from inlining by marking them
with the @code{noinline} attribute.

@item -finline-small-functions
@opindex finline-small-functions
Integrate functions into their callers when their body is smaller than expected
function call code (so overall size of program gets smaller).  The compiler
heuristically decides which functions are simple enough to be worth integrating
in this way.  This inlining applies to all functions, even those not declared
inline.

Enabled at level @option{-O2}.

@item -findirect-inlining
@opindex findirect-inlining
Inline also indirect calls that are discovered to be known at compile
time thanks to previous inlining.  This option has any effect only
when inlining itself is turned on by the @option{-finline-functions}
or @option{-finline-small-functions} options.

Enabled at level @option{-O2}.

@item -finline-functions
@opindex finline-functions
Consider all functions for inlining, even if they are not declared inline.
The compiler heuristically decides which functions are worth integrating
in this way.

If all calls to a given function are integrated, and the function is
declared @code{static}, then the function is normally not output as
assembler code in its own right.

Enabled at level @option{-O3}.

@item -finline-functions-called-once
@opindex finline-functions-called-once
Consider all @code{static} functions called once for inlining into their
caller even if they are not marked @code{inline}.  If a call to a given
function is integrated, then the function is not output as assembler code
in its own right.

Enabled at levels @option{-O1}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3} and @option{-Os}.

@item -fearly-inlining
@opindex fearly-inlining
Inline functions marked by @code{always_inline} and functions whose body seems
smaller than the function call overhead early before doing
@option{-fprofile-generate} instrumentation and real inlining pass.  Doing so
makes profiling significantly cheaper and usually inlining faster on programs
having large chains of nested wrapper functions.

Enabled by default.

@item -fipa-sra
@opindex fipa-sra
Perform interprocedural scalar replacement of aggregates, removal of
unused parameters and replacement of parameters passed by reference
by parameters passed by value.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3} and @option{-Os}.

@item -finline-limit=@var{n}
@opindex finline-limit
By default, LLVM limits the size of functions that can be inlined.  This flag
allows coarse control of this limit.  @var{n} is the size of functions that
can be inlined in number of pseudo instructions.

Inlining is actually controlled by a number of parameters, which may be
specified individually by using @option{--param @var{name}=@var{value}}.
The @option{-finline-limit=@var{n}} option sets some of these parameters
as follows:

@table @gcctabopt
@item max-inline-insns-single
is set to @var{n}/2.
@item max-inline-insns-auto
is set to @var{n}/2.
@end table

See below for a documentation of the individual
parameters controlling inlining and for the defaults of these parameters.

@emph{Note:} there may be no value to @option{-finline-limit} that results
in default behavior.

@emph{Note:} pseudo instruction represents, in this particular context, an
abstract measurement of function's size.  In no way does it represent a count
of assembly instructions and as such its exact meaning might change from one
release to an another.

@item -fno-keep-inline-dllexport
@opindex fno-keep-inline-dllexport
This is a more fine-grained version of @option{-fkeep-inline-functions},
which applies only to functions that are declared using the @code{dllexport}
attribute or declspec (@xref{Function Attributes,,Declaring Attributes of
Functions}.)

@item -fkeep-inline-functions
@opindex fkeep-inline-functions
In C, emit @code{static} functions that are declared @code{inline}
into the object file, even if the function has been inlined into all
of its callers.  This switch does not affect functions using the
@code{extern inline} extension in GNU C90@.  In C++, emit any and all
inline functions into the object file.

@item -fkeep-static-consts
@opindex fkeep-static-consts
Emit variables declared @code{static const} when optimization isn't turned
on, even if the variables aren't referenced.

LLVM enables this option by default.  If you want to force the compiler to
check if a variable is referenced, regardless of whether or not
optimization is turned on, use the @option{-fno-keep-static-consts} option.

@item -fmerge-constants
@opindex fmerge-constants
Attempt to merge identical constants (string constants and floating-point
constants) across compilation units.

This option is the default for optimized compilation if the assembler and
linker support it.  Use @option{-fno-merge-constants} to inhibit this
behavior.

Enabled at levels @option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fmerge-all-constants
@opindex fmerge-all-constants
Attempt to merge identical constants and identical variables.

This option implies @option{-fmerge-constants}.  In addition to
@option{-fmerge-constants} this considers e.g.@: even constant initialized
arrays or initialized constant variables with integral or floating-point
types.  Languages like C or C++ require each variable, including multiple
instances of the same variable in recursive calls, to have distinct locations,
so using this option results in non-conforming
behavior.

@item -fmodulo-sched
@opindex fmodulo-sched
Perform swing modulo scheduling immediately before the first scheduling
pass.  This pass looks at innermost loops and reorders their
instructions by overlapping different iterations.

@item -fmodulo-sched-allow-regmoves
@opindex fmodulo-sched-allow-regmoves
Perform more aggressive SMS-based modulo scheduling with register moves
allowed.  By setting this flag certain anti-dependences edges are
deleted, which triggers the generation of reg-moves based on the
life-range analysis.  This option is effective only with
@option{-fmodulo-sched} enabled.

@item -fno-branch-count-reg
@opindex fno-branch-count-reg
Do not use ``decrement and branch'' instructions on a count register,
but instead generate a sequence of instructions that decrement a
register, compare it against zero, then branch based upon the result.
This option is only meaningful on architectures that support such
instructions, which include x86, PowerPC, IA-64 and S/390.

Enabled by default at @option{-O1} and higher.

The default is @option{-fbranch-count-reg}.

@item -fno-function-cse
@opindex fno-function-cse
Do not put function addresses in registers; make each instruction that
calls a constant function contain the function's address explicitly.

This option results in less efficient code, but some strange hacks
that alter the assembler output may be confused by the optimizations
performed when this option is not used.

The default is @option{-ffunction-cse}

@item -fno-zero-initialized-in-bss
@opindex fno-zero-initialized-in-bss
If the target supports a BSS section, LLVM by default puts variables that
are initialized to zero into BSS@.  This can save space in the resulting
code.

This option turns off this behavior because some programs explicitly
rely on variables going to the data section---e.g., so that the
resulting executable can find the beginning of that section and/or make
assumptions based on that.

The default is @option{-fzero-initialized-in-bss}.

@item -fthread-jumps
@opindex fthread-jumps
Perform optimizations that check to see if a jump branches to a
location where another comparison subsumed by the first is found.  If
so, the first branch is redirected to either the destination of the
second branch or a point immediately following it, depending on whether
the condition is known to be true or false.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fsplit-wide-types
@opindex fsplit-wide-types
When using a type that occupies multiple registers, such as @code{long
long} on a 32-bit system, split the registers apart and allocate them
independently.  This normally generates better code for those types,
but may make debugging more difficult.

Enabled at levels @option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3},
@option{-Os}.

@item -fcse-follow-jumps
@opindex fcse-follow-jumps
In common subexpression elimination (CSE), scan through jump instructions
when the target of the jump is not reached by any other path.  For
example, when CSE encounters an @code{if} statement with an
@code{else} clause, CSE follows the jump when the condition
tested is false.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fcse-skip-blocks
@opindex fcse-skip-blocks
This is similar to @option{-fcse-follow-jumps}, but causes CSE to
follow jumps that conditionally skip over blocks.  When CSE
encounters a simple @code{if} statement with no else clause,
@option{-fcse-skip-blocks} causes CSE to follow the jump around the
body of the @code{if}.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -frerun-cse-after-loop
@opindex frerun-cse-after-loop
Re-run common subexpression elimination after loop optimizations are
performed.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fgcse
@opindex fgcse
Perform a global common subexpression elimination pass.
This pass also performs global constant and copy propagation.

@emph{Note:} When compiling a program using computed gotos, a LLVM
extension, you may get better run-time performance if you disable
the global common subexpression elimination pass by adding
@option{-fno-gcse} to the command line.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fgcse-lm
@opindex fgcse-lm
When @option{-fgcse-lm} is enabled, global common subexpression elimination
attempts to move loads that are only killed by stores into themselves.  This
allows a loop containing a load/store sequence to be changed to a load outside
the loop, and a copy/store within the loop.

Enabled by default when @option{-fgcse} is enabled.

@item -fgcse-sm
@opindex fgcse-sm
When @option{-fgcse-sm} is enabled, a store motion pass is run after
global common subexpression elimination.  This pass attempts to move
stores out of loops.  When used in conjunction with @option{-fgcse-lm},
loops containing a load/store sequence can be changed to a load before
the loop and a store after the loop.

Not enabled at any optimization level.

@item -fgcse-las
@opindex fgcse-las
When @option{-fgcse-las} is enabled, the global common subexpression
elimination pass eliminates redundant loads that come after stores to the
same memory location (both partial and full redundancies).

Not enabled at any optimization level.

@item -fgcse-after-reload
@opindex fgcse-after-reload
When @option{-fgcse-after-reload} is enabled, a redundant load elimination
pass is performed after reload.  The purpose of this pass is to clean up
redundant spilling.

@item -faggressive-loop-optimizations
@opindex faggressive-loop-optimizations
This option tells the loop optimizer to use language constraints to
derive bounds for the number of iterations of a loop.  This assumes that
loop code does not invoke undefined behavior by for example causing signed
integer overflows or out-of-bound array accesses.  The bounds for the
number of iterations of a loop are used to guide loop unrolling and peeling
and loop exit test optimizations.
This option is enabled by default.

@item -funsafe-loop-optimizations
@opindex funsafe-loop-optimizations
This option tells the loop optimizer to assume that loop indices do not
overflow, and that loops with nontrivial exit condition are not
infinite.  This enables a wider range of loop optimizations even if
the loop optimizer itself cannot prove that these assumptions are valid.
If you use @option{-Wunsafe-loop-optimizations}, the compiler warns you
if it finds this kind of loop.

@item -fcrossjumping
@opindex fcrossjumping
Perform cross-jumping transformation.
This transformation unifies equivalent code and saves code size.  The
resulting code may or may not perform better than without cross-jumping.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fauto-inc-dec
@opindex fauto-inc-dec
Combine increments or decrements of addresses with memory accesses.
This pass is always skipped on architectures that do not have
instructions to support this.  Enabled by default at @option{-O} and
higher on architectures that support this.

@item -fdce
@opindex fdce
Perform dead code elimination (DCE) on RTL@.
Enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -fdse
@opindex fdse
Perform dead store elimination (DSE) on RTL@.
Enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -fif-conversion
@opindex fif-conversion
Attempt to transform conditional jumps into branch-less equivalents.  This
includes use of conditional moves, min, max, set flags and abs instructions, and
some tricks doable by standard arithmetics.  The use of conditional execution
on chips where it is available is controlled by @option{-fif-conversion2}.

Enabled at levels @option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fif-conversion2
@opindex fif-conversion2
Use conditional execution (where available) to transform conditional jumps into
branch-less equivalents.

Enabled at levels @option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fdeclone-ctor-dtor
@opindex fdeclone-ctor-dtor
The C++ ABI requires multiple entry points for constructors and
destructors: one for a base subobject, one for a complete object, and
one for a virtual destructor that calls operator delete afterwards.
For a hierarchy with virtual bases, the base and complete variants are
clones, which means two copies of the function.  With this option, the
base and complete variants are changed to be thunks that call a common
implementation.

Enabled by @option{-Os}.

@item -fdelete-null-pointer-checks
@opindex fdelete-null-pointer-checks
Assume that programs cannot safely dereference null pointers, and that
no code or data element resides there.  This enables simple constant
folding optimizations at all optimization levels.  In addition, other
optimization passes in LLVM use this flag to control global dataflow
analyses that eliminate useless checks for null pointers; these assume
that if a pointer is checked after it has already been dereferenced,
it cannot be null.

Note however that in some environments this assumption is not true.
Use @option{-fno-delete-null-pointer-checks} to disable this optimization
for programs that depend on that behavior.

Some targets, especially embedded ones, disable this option at all levels.
Otherwise it is enabled at all levels: @option{-O0}, @option{-O1},
@option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.  Passes that use the information
are enabled independently at different optimization levels.

@item -fdevirtualize
@opindex fdevirtualize
Attempt to convert calls to virtual functions to direct calls.  This
is done both within a procedure and interprocedurally as part of
indirect inlining (@option{-findirect-inlining}) and interprocedural constant
propagation (@option{-fipa-cp}).
Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fdevirtualize-speculatively
@opindex fdevirtualize-speculatively
Attempt to convert calls to virtual functions to speculative direct calls.
Based on the analysis of the type inheritance graph, determine for a given call
the set of likely targets. If the set is small, preferably of size 1, change
the call into a conditional deciding between direct and indirect calls.  The
speculative calls enable more optimizations, such as inlining.  When they seem
useless after further optimization, they are converted back into original form.

@item -fdevirtualize-at-ltrans
@opindex fdevirtualize-at-ltrans
Stream extra information needed for aggressive devirtualization when running
the link-time optimizer in local transformation mode.
This option enables more devirtualization but
significantly increases the size of streamed data. For this reason it is
disabled by default.

@item -fexpensive-optimizations
@opindex fexpensive-optimizations
Perform a number of minor optimizations that are relatively expensive.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -free
@opindex free
Attempt to remove redundant extension instructions.  This is especially
helpful for the x86-64 architecture, which implicitly zero-extends in 64-bit
registers after writing to their lower 32-bit half.

Enabled for Alpha, AArch64 and x86 at levels @option{-O2},
@option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fno-lifetime-dse
@opindex fno-lifetime-dse
In C++ the value of an object is only affected by changes within its
lifetime: when the constructor begins, the object has an indeterminate
value, and any changes during the lifetime of the object are dead when
the object is destroyed.  Normally dead store elimination will take
advantage of this; if your code relies on the value of the object
storage persisting beyond the lifetime of the object, you can use this
flag to disable this optimization.

@item -flive-range-shrinkage
@opindex flive-range-shrinkage
Attempt to decrease register pressure through register live range
shrinkage.  This is helpful for fast processors with small or moderate
size register sets.

@item -fira-algorithm=@var{algorithm}
@opindex fira-algorithm
Use the specified coloring algorithm for the integrated register
allocator.  The @var{algorithm} argument can be @samp{priority}, which
specifies Chow's priority coloring, or @samp{CB}, which specifies
Chaitin-Briggs coloring.  Chaitin-Briggs coloring is not implemented
for all architectures, but for those targets that do support it, it is
the default because it generates better code.

@item -fira-region=@var{region}
@opindex fira-region
Use specified regions for the integrated register allocator.  The
@var{region} argument should be one of the following:

@table @samp

@item all
Use all loops as register allocation regions.
This can give the best results for machines with a small and/or
irregular register set.

@item mixed
Use all loops except for loops with small register pressure
as the regions.  This value usually gives
the best results in most cases and for most architectures,
and is enabled by default when compiling with optimization for speed
(@option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @dots{}).

@item one
Use all functions as a single region.
This typically results in the smallest code size, and is enabled by default for
@option{-Os} or @option{-O0}.

@end table

@item -fira-hoist-pressure
@opindex fira-hoist-pressure
Use IRA to evaluate register pressure in the code hoisting pass for
decisions to hoist expressions.  This option usually results in smaller
code, but it can slow the compiler down.

This option is enabled at level @option{-Os} for all targets.

@item -fira-loop-pressure
@opindex fira-loop-pressure
Use IRA to evaluate register pressure in loops for decisions to move
loop invariants.  This option usually results in generation
of faster and smaller code on machines with large register files (>= 32
registers), but it can slow the compiler down.

This option is enabled at level @option{-O3} for some targets.

@item -fno-ira-share-save-slots
@opindex fno-ira-share-save-slots
Disable sharing of stack slots used for saving call-used hard
registers living through a call.  Each hard register gets a
separate stack slot, and as a result function stack frames are
larger.

@item -fno-ira-share-spill-slots
@opindex fno-ira-share-spill-slots
Disable sharing of stack slots allocated for pseudo-registers.  Each
pseudo-register that does not get a hard register gets a separate
stack slot, and as a result function stack frames are larger.

@item -fira-verbose=@var{n}
@opindex fira-verbose
Control the verbosity of the dump file for the integrated register allocator.
The default value is 5.  If the value @var{n} is greater or equal to 10,
the dump output is sent to stderr using the same format as @var{n} minus 10.

@item -flra-remat
@opindex flra-remat
Enable CFG-sensitive rematerialization in LRA.  Instead of loading
values of spilled pseudos, LRA tries to rematerialize (recalculate)
values if it is profitable.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fdelayed-branch
@opindex fdelayed-branch
If supported for the target machine, attempt to reorder instructions
to exploit instruction slots available after delayed branch
instructions.

Enabled at levels @option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fschedule-insns
@opindex fschedule-insns
If supported for the target machine, attempt to reorder instructions to
eliminate execution stalls due to required data being unavailable.  This
helps machines that have slow floating point or memory load instructions
by allowing other instructions to be issued until the result of the load
or floating-point instruction is required.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}.

@item -fschedule-insns2
@opindex fschedule-insns2
Similar to @option{-fschedule-insns}, but requests an additional pass of
instruction scheduling after register allocation has been done.  This is
especially useful on machines with a relatively small number of
registers and where memory load instructions take more than one cycle.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fno-sched-interblock
@opindex fno-sched-interblock
Don't schedule instructions across basic blocks.  This is normally
enabled by default when scheduling before register allocation, i.e.@:
with @option{-fschedule-insns} or at @option{-O2} or higher.

@item -fno-sched-spec
@opindex fno-sched-spec
Don't allow speculative motion of non-load instructions.  This is normally
enabled by default when scheduling before register allocation, i.e.@:
with @option{-fschedule-insns} or at @option{-O2} or higher.

@item -fsched-pressure
@opindex fsched-pressure
Enable register pressure sensitive insn scheduling before register
allocation.  This only makes sense when scheduling before register
allocation is enabled, i.e.@: with @option{-fschedule-insns} or at
@option{-O2} or higher.  Usage of this option can improve the
generated code and decrease its size by preventing register pressure
increase above the number of available hard registers and subsequent
spills in register allocation.

@item -fsched-spec-load
@opindex fsched-spec-load
Allow speculative motion of some load instructions.  This only makes
sense when scheduling before register allocation, i.e.@: with
@option{-fschedule-insns} or at @option{-O2} or higher.

@item -fsched-spec-load-dangerous
@opindex fsched-spec-load-dangerous
Allow speculative motion of more load instructions.  This only makes
sense when scheduling before register allocation, i.e.@: with
@option{-fschedule-insns} or at @option{-O2} or higher.

@item -fsched-stalled-insns
@itemx -fsched-stalled-insns=@var{n}
@opindex fsched-stalled-insns
Define how many insns (if any) can be moved prematurely from the queue
of stalled insns into the ready list during the second scheduling pass.
@option{-fno-sched-stalled-insns} means that no insns are moved
prematurely, @option{-fsched-stalled-insns=0} means there is no limit
on how many queued insns can be moved prematurely.
@option{-fsched-stalled-insns} without a value is equivalent to
@option{-fsched-stalled-insns=1}.

@item -fsched-stalled-insns-dep
@itemx -fsched-stalled-insns-dep=@var{n}
@opindex fsched-stalled-insns-dep
Define how many insn groups (cycles) are examined for a dependency
on a stalled insn that is a candidate for premature removal from the queue
of stalled insns.  This has an effect only during the second scheduling pass,
and only if @option{-fsched-stalled-insns} is used.
@option{-fno-sched-stalled-insns-dep} is equivalent to
@option{-fsched-stalled-insns-dep=0}.
@option{-fsched-stalled-insns-dep} without a value is equivalent to
@option{-fsched-stalled-insns-dep=1}.

@item -fsched2-use-superblocks
@opindex fsched2-use-superblocks
When scheduling after register allocation, use superblock scheduling.
This allows motion across basic block boundaries,
resulting in faster schedules.  This option is experimental, as not all machine
descriptions used by LLVM model the CPU closely enough to avoid unreliable
results from the algorithm.

This only makes sense when scheduling after register allocation, i.e.@: with
@option{-fschedule-insns2} or at @option{-O2} or higher.

@item -fsched-group-heuristic
@opindex fsched-group-heuristic
Enable the group heuristic in the scheduler.  This heuristic favors
the instruction that belongs to a schedule group.  This is enabled
by default when scheduling is enabled, i.e.@: with @option{-fschedule-insns}
or @option{-fschedule-insns2} or at @option{-O2} or higher.

@item -fsched-critical-path-heuristic
@opindex fsched-critical-path-heuristic
Enable the critical-path heuristic in the scheduler.  This heuristic favors
instructions on the critical path.  This is enabled by default when
scheduling is enabled, i.e.@: with @option{-fschedule-insns}
or @option{-fschedule-insns2} or at @option{-O2} or higher.

@item -fsched-spec-insn-heuristic
@opindex fsched-spec-insn-heuristic
Enable the speculative instruction heuristic in the scheduler.  This
heuristic favors speculative instructions with greater dependency weakness.
This is enabled by default when scheduling is enabled, i.e.@:
with @option{-fschedule-insns} or @option{-fschedule-insns2}
or at @option{-O2} or higher.

@item -fsched-rank-heuristic
@opindex fsched-rank-heuristic
Enable the rank heuristic in the scheduler.  This heuristic favors
the instruction belonging to a basic block with greater size or frequency.
This is enabled by default when scheduling is enabled, i.e.@:
with @option{-fschedule-insns} or @option{-fschedule-insns2} or
at @option{-O2} or higher.

@item -fsched-last-insn-heuristic
@opindex fsched-last-insn-heuristic
Enable the last-instruction heuristic in the scheduler.  This heuristic
favors the instruction that is less dependent on the last instruction
scheduled.  This is enabled by default when scheduling is enabled,
i.e.@: with @option{-fschedule-insns} or @option{-fschedule-insns2} or
at @option{-O2} or higher.

@item -fsched-dep-count-heuristic
@opindex fsched-dep-count-heuristic
Enable the dependent-count heuristic in the scheduler.  This heuristic
favors the instruction that has more instructions depending on it.
This is enabled by default when scheduling is enabled, i.e.@:
with @option{-fschedule-insns} or @option{-fschedule-insns2} or
at @option{-O2} or higher.

@item -freschedule-modulo-scheduled-loops
@opindex freschedule-modulo-scheduled-loops
Modulo scheduling is performed before traditional scheduling.  If a loop
is modulo scheduled, later scheduling passes may change its schedule.
Use this option to control that behavior.

@item -fselective-scheduling
@opindex fselective-scheduling
Schedule instructions using selective scheduling algorithm.  Selective
scheduling runs instead of the first scheduler pass.

@item -fselective-scheduling2
@opindex fselective-scheduling2
Schedule instructions using selective scheduling algorithm.  Selective
scheduling runs instead of the second scheduler pass.

@item -fsel-sched-pipelining
@opindex fsel-sched-pipelining
Enable software pipelining of innermost loops during selective scheduling.
This option has no effect unless one of @option{-fselective-scheduling} or
@option{-fselective-scheduling2} is turned on.

@item -fsel-sched-pipelining-outer-loops
@opindex fsel-sched-pipelining-outer-loops
When pipelining loops during selective scheduling, also pipeline outer loops.
This option has no effect unless @option{-fsel-sched-pipelining} is turned on.

@item -fsemantic-interposition
@opindex fsemantic-interposition
Some object formats, like ELF, allow interposing of symbols by the
dynamic linker.
This means that for symbols exported from the DSO, the compiler cannot perform
interprocedural propagation, inlining and other optimizations in anticipation
that the function or variable in question may change. While this feature is
useful, for example, to rewrite memory allocation functions by a debugging
implementation, it is expensive in the terms of code quality.
With @option{-fno-semantic-interposition} the compiler assumes that
if interposition happens for functions the overwriting function will have
precisely the same semantics (and side effects).
Similarly if interposition happens
for variables, the constructor of the variable will be the same. The flag
has no effect for functions explicitly declared inline
(where it is never allowed for interposition to change semantics)
and for symbols explicitly declared weak.

@item -fshrink-wrap
@opindex fshrink-wrap
Emit function prologues only before parts of the function that need it,
rather than at the top of the function.  This flag is enabled by default at
@option{-O} and higher.

@item -fcaller-saves
@opindex fcaller-saves
Enable allocation of values to registers that are clobbered by
function calls, by emitting extra instructions to save and restore the
registers around such calls.  Such allocation is done only when it
seems to result in better code.

This option is always enabled by default on certain machines, usually
those which have no call-preserved registers to use instead.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fcombine-stack-adjustments
@opindex fcombine-stack-adjustments
Tracks stack adjustments (pushes and pops) and stack memory references
and then tries to find ways to combine them.

Enabled by default at @option{-O1} and higher.

@item -fipa-ra
@opindex fipa-ra
Use caller save registers for allocation if those registers are not used by
any called function.  In that case it is not necessary to save and restore
them around calls.  This is only possible if called functions are part of
same compilation unit as current function and they are compiled before it.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fconserve-stack
@opindex fconserve-stack
Attempt to minimize stack usage.  The compiler attempts to use less
stack space, even if that makes the program slower.  This option
implies setting the @option{large-stack-frame} parameter to 100
and the @option{large-stack-frame-growth} parameter to 400.

@item -ftree-reassoc
@opindex ftree-reassoc
Perform reassociation on trees.  This flag is enabled by default
at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-pre
@opindex ftree-pre
Perform partial redundancy elimination (PRE) on trees.  This flag is
enabled by default at @option{-O2} and @option{-O3}.

@item -ftree-partial-pre
@opindex ftree-partial-pre
Make partial redundancy elimination (PRE) more aggressive.  This flag is
enabled by default at @option{-O3}.

@item -ftree-forwprop
@opindex ftree-forwprop
Perform forward propagation on trees.  This flag is enabled by default
at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-fre
@opindex ftree-fre
Perform full redundancy elimination (FRE) on trees.  The difference
between FRE and PRE is that FRE only considers expressions
that are computed on all paths leading to the redundant computation.
This analysis is faster than PRE, though it exposes fewer redundancies.
This flag is enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-phiprop
@opindex ftree-phiprop
Perform hoisting of loads from conditional pointers on trees.  This
pass is enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -fhoist-adjacent-loads
@opindex fhoist-adjacent-loads
Speculatively hoist loads from both branches of an if-then-else if the
loads are from adjacent locations in the same structure and the target
architecture has a conditional move instruction.  This flag is enabled
by default at @option{-O2} and higher.

@item -ftree-copy-prop
@opindex ftree-copy-prop
Perform copy propagation on trees.  This pass eliminates unnecessary
copy operations.  This flag is enabled by default at @option{-O} and
higher.

@item -fipa-pure-const
@opindex fipa-pure-const
Discover which functions are pure or constant.
Enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -fipa-reference
@opindex fipa-reference
Discover which static variables do not escape the
compilation unit.
Enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -fipa-pta
@opindex fipa-pta
Perform interprocedural pointer analysis and interprocedural modification
and reference analysis.  This option can cause excessive memory and
compile-time usage on large compilation units.  It is not enabled by
default at any optimization level.

@item -fipa-profile
@opindex fipa-profile
Perform interprocedural profile propagation.  The functions called only from
cold functions are marked as cold. Also functions executed once (such as
@code{cold}, @code{noreturn}, static constructors or destructors) are identified. Cold
functions and loop less parts of functions executed once are then optimized for
size.
Enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -fipa-cp
@opindex fipa-cp
Perform interprocedural constant propagation.
This optimization analyzes the program to determine when values passed
to functions are constants and then optimizes accordingly.
This optimization can substantially increase performance
if the application has constants passed to functions.
This flag is enabled by default at @option{-O2}, @option{-Os} and @option{-O3}.

@item -fipa-cp-clone
@opindex fipa-cp-clone
Perform function cloning to make interprocedural constant propagation stronger.
When enabled, interprocedural constant propagation performs function cloning
when externally visible function can be called with constant arguments.
Because this optimization can create multiple copies of functions,
it may significantly increase code size
(see @option{--param ipcp-unit-growth=@var{value}}).
This flag is enabled by default at @option{-O3}.

@item -fipa-cp-alignment
@opindex -fipa-cp-alignment
When enabled, this optimization propagates alignment of function
parameters to support better vectorization and string operations.

This flag is enabled by default at @option{-O2} and @option{-Os}.  It
requires that @option{-fipa-cp} is enabled.

@item -fipa-icf
@opindex fipa-icf
Perform Identical Code Folding for functions and read-only variables.
The optimization reduces code size and may disturb unwind stacks by replacing
a function by equivalent one with a different name. The optimization works
more effectively with link time optimization enabled.

Nevertheless the behavior is similar to Gold Linker ICF optimization, LLVM ICF
works on different levels and thus the optimizations are not same - there are
equivalences that are found only by LLVM and equivalences found only by Gold.

This flag is enabled by default at @option{-O2} and @option{-Os}.

@item -fisolate-erroneous-paths-dereference
@opindex fisolate-erroneous-paths-dereference
Detect paths that trigger erroneous or undefined behavior due to
dereferencing a null pointer.  Isolate those paths from the main control
flow and turn the statement with erroneous or undefined behavior into a trap.
This flag is enabled by default at @option{-O2} and higher.

@item -fisolate-erroneous-paths-attribute
@opindex fisolate-erroneous-paths-attribute
Detect paths that trigger erroneous or undefined behavior due a null value
being used in a way forbidden by a @code{returns_nonnull} or @code{nonnull}
attribute.  Isolate those paths from the main control flow and turn the
statement with erroneous or undefined behavior into a trap.  This is not
currently enabled, but may be enabled by @option{-O2} in the future.

@item -ftree-sink
@opindex ftree-sink
Perform forward store motion  on trees.  This flag is
enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-bit-ccp
@opindex ftree-bit-ccp
Perform sparse conditional bit constant propagation on trees and propagate
pointer alignment information.
This pass only operates on local scalar variables and is enabled by default
at @option{-O} and higher.  It requires that @option{-ftree-ccp} is enabled.

@item -ftree-ccp
@opindex ftree-ccp
Perform sparse conditional constant propagation (CCP) on trees.  This
pass only operates on local scalar variables and is enabled by default
at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -fssa-phiopt
@opindex fssa-phiopt
Perform pattern matching on SSA PHI nodes to optimize conditional
code.  This pass is enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-switch-conversion
@opindex ftree-switch-conversion
Perform conversion of simple initializations in a switch to
initializations from a scalar array.  This flag is enabled by default
at @option{-O2} and higher.

@item -ftree-tail-merge
@opindex ftree-tail-merge
Look for identical code sequences.  When found, replace one with a jump to the
other.  This optimization is known as tail merging or cross jumping.  This flag
is enabled by default at @option{-O2} and higher.  The compilation time
in this pass can
be limited using @option{max-tail-merge-comparisons} parameter and
@option{max-tail-merge-iterations} parameter.

@item -ftree-dce
@opindex ftree-dce
Perform dead code elimination (DCE) on trees.  This flag is enabled by
default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-builtin-call-dce
@opindex ftree-builtin-call-dce
Perform conditional dead code elimination (DCE) for calls to built-in functions
that may set @code{errno} but are otherwise side-effect free.  This flag is
enabled by default at @option{-O2} and higher if @option{-Os} is not also
specified.

@item -ftree-dominator-opts
@opindex ftree-dominator-opts
Perform a variety of simple scalar cleanups (constant/copy
propagation, redundancy elimination, range propagation and expression
simplification) based on a dominator tree traversal.  This also
performs jump threading (to reduce jumps to jumps). This flag is
enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-dse
@opindex ftree-dse
Perform dead store elimination (DSE) on trees.  A dead store is a store into
a memory location that is later overwritten by another store without
any intervening loads.  In this case the earlier store can be deleted.  This
flag is enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-ch
@opindex ftree-ch
Perform loop header copying on trees.  This is beneficial since it increases
effectiveness of code motion optimizations.  It also saves one jump.  This flag
is enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.  It is not enabled
for @option{-Os}, since it usually increases code size.

@item -ftree-loop-optimize
@opindex ftree-loop-optimize
Perform loop optimizations on trees.  This flag is enabled by default
at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-loop-linear
@opindex ftree-loop-linear
Perform loop interchange transformations on tree.  Same as
@option{-floop-interchange}.  To use this code transformation, LLVM has
to be configured with @option{--with-isl} to enable the Graphite loop
transformation infrastructure.

@item -floop-interchange
@opindex floop-interchange
Perform loop interchange transformations on loops.  Interchanging two
nested loops switches the inner and outer loops.  For example, given a
loop like:
@smallexample
DO J = 1, M
  DO I = 1, N
    A(J, I) = A(J, I) * C
  ENDDO
ENDDO
@end smallexample
@noindent
loop interchange transforms the loop as if it were written:
@smallexample
DO I = 1, N
  DO J = 1, M
    A(J, I) = A(J, I) * C
  ENDDO
ENDDO
@end smallexample
which can be beneficial when @code{N} is larger than the caches,
because in Fortran, the elements of an array are stored in memory
contiguously by column, and the original loop iterates over rows,
potentially creating at each access a cache miss.  This optimization
applies to all the languages supported by LLVM and is not limited to
Fortran.  To use this code transformation, LLVM has to be configured
with @option{--with-isl} to enable the Graphite loop transformation
infrastructure.

@item -floop-strip-mine
@opindex floop-strip-mine
Perform loop strip mining transformations on loops.  Strip mining
splits a loop into two nested loops.  The outer loop has strides
equal to the strip size and the inner loop has strides of the
original loop within a strip.  The strip length can be changed
using the @option{loop-block-tile-size} parameter.  For example,
given a loop like:
@smallexample
DO I = 1, N
  A(I) = A(I) + C
ENDDO
@end smallexample
@noindent
loop strip mining transforms the loop as if it were written:
@smallexample
DO II = 1, N, 51
  DO I = II, min (II + 50, N)
    A(I) = A(I) + C
  ENDDO
ENDDO
@end smallexample
This optimization applies to all the languages supported by LLVM and is
not limited to Fortran.  To use this code transformation, LLVM has to
be configured with @option{--with-isl} to enable the Graphite loop
transformation infrastructure.

@item -floop-block
@opindex floop-block
Perform loop blocking transformations on loops.  Blocking strip mines
each loop in the loop nest such that the memory accesses of the
element loops fit inside caches.  The strip length can be changed
using the @option{loop-block-tile-size} parameter.  For example, given
a loop like:
@smallexample
DO I = 1, N
  DO J = 1, M
    A(J, I) = B(I) + C(J)
  ENDDO
ENDDO
@end smallexample
@noindent
loop blocking transforms the loop as if it were written:
@smallexample
DO II = 1, N, 51
  DO JJ = 1, M, 51
    DO I = II, min (II + 50, N)
      DO J = JJ, min (JJ + 50, M)
        A(J, I) = B(I) + C(J)
      ENDDO
    ENDDO
  ENDDO
ENDDO
@end smallexample
which can be beneficial when @code{M} is larger than the caches,
because the innermost loop iterates over a smaller amount of data
which can be kept in the caches.  This optimization applies to all the
languages supported by LLVM and is not limited to Fortran.  To use this
code transformation, LLVM has to be configured with @option{--with-isl}
to enable the Graphite loop transformation infrastructure.

@item -fgraphite-identity
@opindex fgraphite-identity
Enable the identity transformation for graphite.  For every SCoP we generate
the polyhedral representation and transform it back to gimple.  Using
@option{-fgraphite-identity} we can check the costs or benefits of the
GIMPLE -> GRAPHITE -> GIMPLE transformation.  Some minimal optimizations
are also performed by the code generator ISL, like index splitting and
dead code elimination in loops.

@item -floop-nest-optimize
@opindex floop-nest-optimize
Enable the ISL based loop nest optimizer.  This is a generic loop nest
optimizer based on the Pluto optimization algorithms.  It calculates a loop
structure optimized for data-locality and parallelism.  This option
is experimental.

@item -floop-unroll-and-jam
@opindex floop-unroll-and-jam
Enable unroll and jam for the ISL based loop nest optimizer.  The unroll
factor can be changed using the @option{loop-unroll-jam-size} parameter.
The unrolled dimension (counting from the most inner one) can be changed
using the @option{loop-unroll-jam-depth} parameter.                 .

@item -floop-parallelize-all
@opindex floop-parallelize-all
Use the Graphite data dependence analysis to identify loops that can
be parallelized.  Parallelize all the loops that can be analyzed to
not contain loop carried dependences without checking that it is
profitable to parallelize the loops.

@item -fcheck-data-deps
@opindex fcheck-data-deps
Compare the results of several data dependence analyzers.  This option
is used for debugging the data dependence analyzers.

@item -ftree-loop-if-convert
@opindex ftree-loop-if-convert
Attempt to transform conditional jumps in the innermost loops to
branch-less equivalents.  The intent is to remove control-flow from
the innermost loops in order to improve the ability of the
vectorization pass to handle these loops.  This is enabled by default
if vectorization is enabled.

@item -ftree-loop-if-convert-stores
@opindex ftree-loop-if-convert-stores
Attempt to also if-convert conditional jumps containing memory writes.
This transformation can be unsafe for multi-threaded programs as it
transforms conditional memory writes into unconditional memory writes.
For example,
@smallexample
for (i = 0; i < N; i++)
  if (cond)
    A[i] = expr;
@end smallexample
is transformed to
@smallexample
for (i = 0; i < N; i++)
  A[i] = cond ? expr : A[i];
@end smallexample
potentially producing data races.

@item -ftree-loop-distribution
@opindex ftree-loop-distribution
Perform loop distribution.  This flag can improve cache performance on
big loop bodies and allow further loop optimizations, like
parallelization or vectorization, to take place.  For example, the loop
@smallexample
DO I = 1, N
  A(I) = B(I) + C
  D(I) = E(I) * F
ENDDO
@end smallexample
is transformed to
@smallexample
DO I = 1, N
   A(I) = B(I) + C
ENDDO
DO I = 1, N
   D(I) = E(I) * F
ENDDO
@end smallexample

@item -ftree-loop-distribute-patterns
@opindex ftree-loop-distribute-patterns
Perform loop distribution of patterns that can be code generated with
calls to a library.  This flag is enabled by default at @option{-O3}.

This pass distributes the initialization loops and generates a call to
memset zero.  For example, the loop
@smallexample
DO I = 1, N
  A(I) = 0
  B(I) = A(I) + I
ENDDO
@end smallexample
is transformed to
@smallexample
DO I = 1, N
   A(I) = 0
ENDDO
DO I = 1, N
   B(I) = A(I) + I
ENDDO
@end smallexample
and the initialization loop is transformed into a call to memset zero.

@item -ftree-loop-im
@opindex ftree-loop-im
Perform loop invariant motion on trees.  This pass moves only invariants that
are hard to handle at RTL level (function calls, operations that expand to
nontrivial sequences of insns).  With @option{-funswitch-loops} it also moves
operands of conditions that are invariant out of the loop, so that we can use
just trivial invariantness analysis in loop unswitching.  The pass also includes
store motion.

@item -ftree-loop-ivcanon
@opindex ftree-loop-ivcanon
Create a canonical counter for number of iterations in loops for which
determining number of iterations requires complicated analysis.  Later
optimizations then may determine the number easily.  Useful especially
in connection with unrolling.

@item -fivopts
@opindex fivopts
Perform induction variable optimizations (strength reduction, induction
variable merging and induction variable elimination) on trees.

@item -ftree-parallelize-loops=n
@opindex ftree-parallelize-loops
Parallelize loops, i.e., split their iteration space to run in n threads.
This is only possible for loops whose iterations are independent
and can be arbitrarily reordered.  The optimization is only
profitable on multiprocessor machines, for loops that are CPU-intensive,
rather than constrained e.g.@: by memory bandwidth.  This option
implies @option{-pthread}, and thus is only supported on targets
that have support for @option{-pthread}.

@item -ftree-pta
@opindex ftree-pta
Perform function-local points-to analysis on trees.  This flag is
enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-sra
@opindex ftree-sra
Perform scalar replacement of aggregates.  This pass replaces structure
references with scalars to prevent committing structures to memory too
early.  This flag is enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-copyrename
@opindex ftree-copyrename
Perform copy renaming on trees.  This pass attempts to rename compiler
temporaries to other variables at copy locations, usually resulting in
variable names which more closely resemble the original variables.  This flag
is enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-coalesce-inlined-vars
@opindex ftree-coalesce-inlined-vars
Tell the copyrename pass (see @option{-ftree-copyrename}) to attempt to
combine small user-defined variables too, but only if they are inlined
from other functions.  It is a more limited form of
@option{-ftree-coalesce-vars}.  This may harm debug information of such
inlined variables, but it keeps variables of the inlined-into
function apart from each other, such that they are more likely to
contain the expected values in a debugging session.

@item -ftree-coalesce-vars
@opindex ftree-coalesce-vars
Tell the copyrename pass (see @option{-ftree-copyrename}) to attempt to
combine small user-defined variables too, instead of just compiler
temporaries.  This may severely limit the ability to debug an optimized
program compiled with @option{-fno-var-tracking-assignments}.  In the
negated form, this flag prevents SSA coalescing of user variables,
including inlined ones.  This option is enabled by default.

@item -ftree-ter
@opindex ftree-ter
Perform temporary expression replacement during the SSA->normal phase.  Single
use/single def temporaries are replaced at their use location with their
defining expression.  This results in non-GIMPLE code, but gives the expanders
much more complex trees to work on resulting in better RTL generation.  This is
enabled by default at @option{-O} and higher.

@item -ftree-slsr
@opindex ftree-slsr
Perform straight-line strength reduction on trees.  This recognizes related
expressions involving multiplications and replaces them by less expensive
calculations when possible.  This is enabled by default at @option{-O} and
higher.

@item -ftree-vectorize
@opindex ftree-vectorize
Perform vectorization on trees. This flag enables @option{-ftree-loop-vectorize}
and @option{-ftree-slp-vectorize} if not explicitly specified.

@item -ftree-loop-vectorize
@opindex ftree-loop-vectorize
Perform loop vectorization on trees. This flag is enabled by default at
@option{-O3} and when @option{-ftree-vectorize} is enabled.

@item -ftree-slp-vectorize
@opindex ftree-slp-vectorize
Perform basic block vectorization on trees. This flag is enabled by default at
@option{-O3} and when @option{-ftree-vectorize} is enabled.

@item -fvect-cost-model=@var{model}
@opindex fvect-cost-model
Alter the cost model used for vectorization.  The @var{model} argument
should be one of @samp{unlimited}, @samp{dynamic} or @samp{cheap}.
With the @samp{unlimited} model the vectorized code-path is assumed
to be profitable while with the @samp{dynamic} model a runtime check
guards the vectorized code-path to enable it only for iteration
counts that will likely execute faster than when executing the original
scalar loop.  The @samp{cheap} model disables vectorization of
loops where doing so would be cost prohibitive for example due to
required runtime checks for data dependence or alignment but otherwise
is equal to the @samp{dynamic} model.
The default cost model depends on other optimization flags and is
either @samp{dynamic} or @samp{cheap}.

@item -fsimd-cost-model=@var{model}
@opindex fsimd-cost-model
Alter the cost model used for vectorization of loops marked with the OpenMP
or Cilk Plus simd directive.  The @var{model} argument should be one of
@samp{unlimited}, @samp{dynamic}, @samp{cheap}.  All values of @var{model}
have the same meaning as described in @option{-fvect-cost-model} and by
default a cost model defined with @option{-fvect-cost-model} is used.

@item -ftree-vrp
@opindex ftree-vrp
Perform Value Range Propagation on trees.  This is similar to the
constant propagation pass, but instead of values, ranges of values are
propagated.  This allows the optimizers to remove unnecessary range
checks like array bound checks and null pointer checks.  This is
enabled by default at @option{-O2} and higher.  Null pointer check
elimination is only done if @option{-fdelete-null-pointer-checks} is
enabled.

@item -fsplit-ivs-in-unroller
@opindex fsplit-ivs-in-unroller
Enables expression of values of induction variables in later iterations
of the unrolled loop using the value in the first iteration.  This breaks
long dependency chains, thus improving efficiency of the scheduling passes.

A combination of @option{-fweb} and CSE is often sufficient to obtain the
same effect.  However, that is not reliable in cases where the loop body
is more complicated than a single basic block.  It also does not work at all
on some architectures due to restrictions in the CSE pass.

This optimization is enabled by default.

@item -fvariable-expansion-in-unroller
@opindex fvariable-expansion-in-unroller
With this option, the compiler creates multiple copies of some
local variables when unrolling a loop, which can result in superior code.

@item -fpartial-inlining
@opindex fpartial-inlining
Inline parts of functions.  This option has any effect only
when inlining itself is turned on by the @option{-finline-functions}
or @option{-finline-small-functions} options.

Enabled at level @option{-O2}.

@item -fpredictive-commoning
@opindex fpredictive-commoning
Perform predictive commoning optimization, i.e., reusing computations
(especially memory loads and stores) performed in previous
iterations of loops.

This option is enabled at level @option{-O3}.

@item -fprefetch-loop-arrays
@opindex fprefetch-loop-arrays
If supported by the target machine, generate instructions to prefetch
memory to improve the performance of loops that access large arrays.

This option may generate better or worse code; results are highly
dependent on the structure of loops within the source code.

Disabled at level @option{-Os}.

@item -fno-peephole
@itemx -fno-peephole2
@opindex fno-peephole
@opindex fno-peephole2
Disable any machine-specific peephole optimizations.  The difference
between @option{-fno-peephole} and @option{-fno-peephole2} is in how they
are implemented in the compiler; some targets use one, some use the
other, a few use both.

@option{-fpeephole} is enabled by default.
@option{-fpeephole2} enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fno-guess-branch-probability
@opindex fno-guess-branch-probability
Do not guess branch probabilities using heuristics.

LLVM uses heuristics to guess branch probabilities if they are
not provided by profiling feedback (@option{-fprofile-arcs}).  These
heuristics are based on the control flow graph.  If some branch probabilities
are specified by @code{__builtin_expect}, then the heuristics are
used to guess branch probabilities for the rest of the control flow graph,
taking the @code{__builtin_expect} info into account.  The interactions
between the heuristics and @code{__builtin_expect} can be complex, and in
some cases, it may be useful to disable the heuristics so that the effects
of @code{__builtin_expect} are easier to understand.

The default is @option{-fguess-branch-probability} at levels
@option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -freorder-blocks
@opindex freorder-blocks
Reorder basic blocks in the compiled function in order to reduce number of
taken branches and improve code locality.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}.

@item -freorder-blocks-and-partition
@opindex freorder-blocks-and-partition
In addition to reordering basic blocks in the compiled function, in order
to reduce number of taken branches, partitions hot and cold basic blocks
into separate sections of the assembly and .o files, to improve
paging and cache locality performance.

This optimization is automatically turned off in the presence of
exception handling, for linkonce sections, for functions with a user-defined
section attribute and on any architecture that does not support named
sections.

Enabled for x86 at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}.

@item -freorder-functions
@opindex freorder-functions
Reorder functions in the object file in order to
improve code locality.  This is implemented by using special
subsections @code{.text.hot} for most frequently executed functions and
@code{.text.unlikely} for unlikely executed functions.  Reordering is done by
the linker so object file format must support named sections and linker must
place them in a reasonable way.

Also profile feedback must be available to make this option effective.  See
@option{-fprofile-arcs} for details.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fstrict-aliasing
@opindex fstrict-aliasing
Allow the compiler to assume the strictest aliasing rules applicable to
the language being compiled.  For C (and C++), this activates
optimizations based on the type of expressions.  In particular, an
object of one type is assumed never to reside at the same address as an
object of a different type, unless the types are almost the same.  For
example, an @code{unsigned int} can alias an @code{int}, but not a
@code{void*} or a @code{double}.  A character type may alias any other
type.

@anchor{Type-punning}Pay special attention to code like this:
@smallexample
union a_union @{
  int i;
  double d;
@};

int f() @{
  union a_union t;
  t.d = 3.0;
  return t.i;
@}
@end smallexample
The practice of reading from a different union member than the one most
recently written to (called ``type-punning'') is common.  Even with
@option{-fstrict-aliasing}, type-punning is allowed, provided the memory
is accessed through the union type.  So, the code above works as
expected.  @xref{Structures unions enumerations and bit-fields
implementation}.  However, this code might not:
@smallexample
int f() @{
  union a_union t;
  int* ip;
  t.d = 3.0;
  ip = &t.i;
  return *ip;
@}
@end smallexample

Similarly, access by taking the address, casting the resulting pointer
and dereferencing the result has undefined behavior, even if the cast
uses a union type, e.g.:
@smallexample
int f() @{
  double d = 3.0;
  return ((union a_union *) &d)->i;
@}
@end smallexample

The @option{-fstrict-aliasing} option is enabled at levels
@option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fstrict-overflow
@opindex fstrict-overflow
Allow the compiler to assume strict signed overflow rules, depending
on the language being compiled.  For C (and C++) this means that
overflow when doing arithmetic with signed numbers is undefined, which
means that the compiler may assume that it does not happen.  This
permits various optimizations.  For example, the compiler assumes
that an expression like @code{i + 10 > i} is always true for
signed @code{i}.  This assumption is only valid if signed overflow is
undefined, as the expression is false if @code{i + 10} overflows when
using twos complement arithmetic.  When this option is in effect any
attempt to determine whether an operation on signed numbers
overflows must be written carefully to not actually involve overflow.

This option also allows the compiler to assume strict pointer
semantics: given a pointer to an object, if adding an offset to that
pointer does not produce a pointer to the same object, the addition is
undefined.  This permits the compiler to conclude that @code{p + u >
p} is always true for a pointer @code{p} and unsigned integer
@code{u}.  This assumption is only valid because pointer wraparound is
undefined, as the expression is false if @code{p + u} overflows using
twos complement arithmetic.

See also the @option{-fwrapv} option.  Using @option{-fwrapv} means
that integer signed overflow is fully defined: it wraps.  When
@option{-fwrapv} is used, there is no difference between
@option{-fstrict-overflow} and @option{-fno-strict-overflow} for
integers.  With @option{-fwrapv} certain types of overflow are
permitted.  For example, if the compiler gets an overflow when doing
arithmetic on constants, the overflowed value can still be used with
@option{-fwrapv}, but not otherwise.

The @option{-fstrict-overflow} option is enabled at levels
@option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -falign-functions
@itemx -falign-functions=@var{n}
@opindex falign-functions
Align the start of functions to the next power-of-two greater than
@var{n}, skipping up to @var{n} bytes.  For instance,
@option{-falign-functions=32} aligns functions to the next 32-byte
boundary, but @option{-falign-functions=24} aligns to the next
32-byte boundary only if this can be done by skipping 23 bytes or less.

@option{-fno-align-functions} and @option{-falign-functions=1} are
equivalent and mean that functions are not aligned.

Some assemblers only support this flag when @var{n} is a power of two;
in that case, it is rounded up.

If @var{n} is not specified or is zero, use a machine-dependent default.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}.

@item -falign-labels
@itemx -falign-labels=@var{n}
@opindex falign-labels
Align all branch targets to a power-of-two boundary, skipping up to
@var{n} bytes like @option{-falign-functions}.  This option can easily
make code slower, because it must insert dummy operations for when the
branch target is reached in the usual flow of the code.

@option{-fno-align-labels} and @option{-falign-labels=1} are
equivalent and mean that labels are not aligned.

If @option{-falign-loops} or @option{-falign-jumps} are applicable and
are greater than this value, then their values are used instead.

If @var{n} is not specified or is zero, use a machine-dependent default
which is very likely to be @samp{1}, meaning no alignment.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}.

@item -falign-loops
@itemx -falign-loops=@var{n}
@opindex falign-loops
Align loops to a power-of-two boundary, skipping up to @var{n} bytes
like @option{-falign-functions}.  If the loops are
executed many times, this makes up for any execution of the dummy
operations.

@option{-fno-align-loops} and @option{-falign-loops=1} are
equivalent and mean that loops are not aligned.

If @var{n} is not specified or is zero, use a machine-dependent default.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}.

@item -falign-jumps
@itemx -falign-jumps=@var{n}
@opindex falign-jumps
Align branch targets to a power-of-two boundary, for branch targets
where the targets can only be reached by jumping, skipping up to @var{n}
bytes like @option{-falign-functions}.  In this case, no dummy operations
need be executed.

@option{-fno-align-jumps} and @option{-falign-jumps=1} are
equivalent and mean that loops are not aligned.

If @var{n} is not specified or is zero, use a machine-dependent default.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}.

@item -funit-at-a-time
@opindex funit-at-a-time
This option is left for compatibility reasons. @option{-funit-at-a-time}
has no effect, while @option{-fno-unit-at-a-time} implies
@option{-fno-toplevel-reorder} and @option{-fno-section-anchors}.

Enabled by default.

@item -fno-toplevel-reorder
@opindex fno-toplevel-reorder
Do not reorder top-level functions, variables, and @code{asm}
statements.  Output them in the same order that they appear in the
input file.  When this option is used, unreferenced static variables
are not removed.  This option is intended to support existing code
that relies on a particular ordering.  For new code, it is better to
use attributes when possible.

Enabled at level @option{-O0}.  When disabled explicitly, it also implies
@option{-fno-section-anchors}, which is otherwise enabled at @option{-O0} on some
targets.

@item -fweb
@opindex fweb
Constructs webs as commonly used for register allocation purposes and assign
each web individual pseudo register.  This allows the register allocation pass
to operate on pseudos directly, but also strengthens several other optimization
passes, such as CSE, loop optimizer and trivial dead code remover.  It can,
however, make debugging impossible, since variables no longer stay in a
``home register''.

Enabled by default with @option{-funroll-loops}.

@item -fwhole-program
@opindex fwhole-program
Assume that the current compilation unit represents the whole program being
compiled.  All public functions and variables with the exception of @code{main}
and those merged by attribute @code{externally_visible} become static functions
and in effect are optimized more aggressively by interprocedural optimizers.

This option should not be used in combination with @option{-flto}.
Instead relying on a linker plugin should provide safer and more precise
information.

@item -flto[=@var{n}]
@opindex flto
This option runs the standard link-time optimizer.  When invoked
with source code, it generates GIMPLE (one of LLVM's internal
representations) and writes it to special ELF sections in the object
file.  When the object files are linked together, all the function
bodies are read from these ELF sections and instantiated as if they
had been part of the same translation unit.

To use the link-time optimizer, @option{-flto} and optimization
options should be specified at compile time and during the final link.
For example:

@smallexample
clang -c -O2 -flto foo.c
clang -c -O2 -flto bar.c
clang -o myprog -flto -O2 foo.o bar.o
@end smallexample

The first two invocations to LLVM save a bytecode representation
of GIMPLE into special ELF sections inside @file{foo.o} and
@file{bar.o}.  The final invocation reads the GIMPLE bytecode from
@file{foo.o} and @file{bar.o}, merges the two files into a single
internal image, and compiles the result as usual.  Since both
@file{foo.o} and @file{bar.o} are merged into a single image, this
causes all the interprocedural analyses and optimizations in LLVM to
work across the two files as if they were a single one.  This means,
for example, that the inliner is able to inline functions in
@file{bar.o} into functions in @file{foo.o} and vice-versa.

Another (simpler) way to enable link-time optimization is:

@smallexample
clang -o myprog -flto -O2 foo.c bar.c
@end smallexample

The above generates bytecode for @file{foo.c} and @file{bar.c},
merges them together into a single GIMPLE representation and optimizes
them as usual to produce @file{myprog}.

The only important thing to keep in mind is that to enable link-time
optimizations you need to use the LLVM driver to perform the link-step.
LLVM then automatically performs link-time optimization if any of the
objects involved were compiled with the @option{-flto}.  You generally
should specify the optimization options to be used for link-time
optimization though LLVM tries to be clever at guessing an
optimization level to use from the options used at compile-time
if you fail to specify one at link-time.  You can always override
the automatic decision to do link-time optimization at link-time
by passing @option{-fno-lto} to the link command.

To make whole program optimization effective, it is necessary to make
certain whole program assumptions.  The compiler needs to know
what functions and variables can be accessed by libraries and runtime
outside of the link-time optimized unit.  When supported by the linker,
the linker plugin (see @option{-fuse-linker-plugin}) passes information
to the compiler about used and externally visible symbols.  When
the linker plugin is not available, @option{-fwhole-program} should be
used to allow the compiler to make these assumptions, which leads
to more aggressive optimization decisions.

When @option{-fuse-linker-plugin} is not enabled then, when a file is
compiled with @option{-flto}, the generated object file is larger than
a regular object file because it contains GIMPLE bytecodes and the usual
final code (see @option{-ffat-lto-objects}.  This means that
object files with LTO information can be linked as normal object
files; if @option{-fno-lto} is passed to the linker, no
interprocedural optimizations are applied.  Note that when
@option{-fno-fat-lto-objects} is enabled the compile-stage is faster
but you cannot perform a regular, non-LTO link on them.

Additionally, the optimization flags used to compile individual files
are not necessarily related to those used at link time.  For instance,

@smallexample
clang -c -O0 -ffat-lto-objects -flto foo.c
clang -c -O0 -ffat-lto-objects -flto bar.c
clang -o myprog -O3 foo.o bar.o
@end smallexample

This produces individual object files with unoptimized assembler
code, but the resulting binary @file{myprog} is optimized at
@option{-O3}.  If, instead, the final binary is generated with
@option{-fno-lto}, then @file{myprog} is not optimized.

When producing the final binary, LLVM only
applies link-time optimizations to those files that contain bytecode.
Therefore, you can mix and match object files and libraries with
GIMPLE bytecodes and final object code.  LLVM automatically selects
which files to optimize in LTO mode and which files to link without
further processing.

There are some code generation flags preserved by LLVM when
generating bytecodes, as they need to be used during the final link
stage.  Generally options specified at link-time override those
specified at compile-time.

If you do not specify an optimization level option @option{-O} at
link-time then LLVM computes one based on the optimization levels
used when compiling the object files.  The highest optimization
level wins here.

Currently, the following options and their setting are take from
the first object file that explicitely specified it:
@option{-fPIC}, @option{-fpic}, @option{-fpie}, @option{-fcommon},
@option{-fexceptions}, @option{-fnon-call-exceptions}, @option{-fgnu-tm}
and all the @option{-m} target flags.

Certain ABI changing flags are required to match in all compilation-units
and trying to override this at link-time with a conflicting value
is ignored.  This includes options such as @option{-freg-struct-return}
and @option{-fpcc-struct-return}.

Other options such as @option{-ffp-contract}, @option{-fno-strict-overflow},
@option{-fwrapv}, @option{-fno-trapv} or @option{-fno-strict-aliasing}
are passed through to the link stage and merged conservatively for
conflicting translation units.  Specifically
@option{-fno-strict-overflow}, @option{-fwrapv} and @option{-fno-trapv} take
precedence and for example @option{-ffp-contract=off} takes precedence
over @option{-ffp-contract=fast}.  You can override them at linke-time.

It is recommended that you compile all the files participating in the
same link with the same options and also specify those options at
link time.

If LTO encounters objects with C linkage declared with incompatible
types in separate translation units to be linked together (undefined
behavior according to ISO C99 6.2.7), a non-fatal diagnostic may be
issued.  The behavior is still undefined at run time.  Similar
diagnostics may be raised for other languages.

Another feature of LTO is that it is possible to apply interprocedural
optimizations on files written in different languages:

@smallexample
clang -c -flto foo.c
g++ -c -flto bar.cc
gfortran -c -flto baz.f90
g++ -o myprog -flto -O3 foo.o bar.o baz.o -lgfortran
@end smallexample

Notice that the final link is done with @command{g++} to get the C++
runtime libraries and @option{-lgfortran} is added to get the Fortran
runtime libraries.  In general, when mixing languages in LTO mode, you
should use the same link command options as when mixing languages in a
regular (non-LTO) compilation.

If object files containing GIMPLE bytecode are stored in a library archive, say
@file{libfoo.a}, it is possible to extract and use them in an LTO link if you
are using a linker with plugin support.  To create static libraries suitable
for LTO, use @command{gcc-ar} and @command{gcc-ranlib} instead of @command{ar}
and @command{ranlib};
to show the symbols of object files with GIMPLE bytecode, use
@command{gcc-nm}.  Those commands require that @command{ar}, @command{ranlib}
and @command{nm} have been compiled with plugin support.  At link time, use the the
flag @option{-fuse-linker-plugin} to ensure that the library participates in
the LTO optimization process:

@smallexample
clang -o myprog -O2 -flto -fuse-linker-plugin a.o b.o -lfoo
@end smallexample

With the linker plugin enabled, the linker extracts the needed
GIMPLE files from @file{libfoo.a} and passes them on to the running LLVM
to make them part of the aggregated GIMPLE image to be optimized.

If you are not using a linker with plugin support and/or do not
enable the linker plugin, then the objects inside @file{libfoo.a}
are extracted and linked as usual, but they do not participate
in the LTO optimization process.  In order to make a static library suitable
for both LTO optimization and usual linkage, compile its object files with
@option{-flto} @option{-ffat-lto-objects}.

Link-time optimizations do not require the presence of the whole program to
operate.  If the program does not require any symbols to be exported, it is
possible to combine @option{-flto} and @option{-fwhole-program} to allow
the interprocedural optimizers to use more aggressive assumptions which may
lead to improved optimization opportunities.
Use of @option{-fwhole-program} is not needed when linker plugin is
active (see @option{-fuse-linker-plugin}).

The current implementation of LTO makes no
attempt to generate bytecode that is portable between different
types of hosts.  The bytecode files are versioned and there is a
strict version check, so bytecode files generated in one version of
LLVM do not work with an older or newer version of LLVM.

Link-time optimization does not work well with generation of debugging
information.  Combining @option{-flto} with
@option{-g} is currently experimental and expected to produce unexpected
results.

If you specify the optional @var{n}, the optimization and code
generation done at link time is executed in parallel using @var{n}
parallel jobs by utilizing an installed @command{make} program.  The
environment variable @env{MAKE} may be used to override the program
used.  The default value for @var{n} is 1.

You can also specify @option{-flto=jobserver} to use GNU make's
job server mode to determine the number of parallel jobs. This
is useful when the Makefile calling LLVM is already executing in parallel.
You must prepend a @samp{+} to the command recipe in the parent Makefile
for this to work.  This option likely only works if @env{MAKE} is
GNU make.

@item -flto-partition=@var{alg}
@opindex flto-partition
Specify the partitioning algorithm used by the link-time optimizer.
The value is either @samp{1to1} to specify a partitioning mirroring
the original source files or @samp{balanced} to specify partitioning
into equally sized chunks (whenever possible) or @samp{max} to create
new partition for every symbol where possible.  Specifying @samp{none}
as an algorithm disables partitioning and streaming completely.
The default value is @samp{balanced}. While @samp{1to1} can be used
as an workaround for various code ordering issues, the @samp{max}
partitioning is intended for internal testing only.
The value @samp{one} specifies that exactly one partition should be
used while the value @samp{none} bypasses partitioning and executes
the link-time optimization step directly from the WPA phase.

@item -flto-odr-type-merging
@opindex flto-odr-type-merging
Enable streaming of mangled types names of C++ types and their unification
at linktime.  This increases size of LTO object files, but enable
diagnostics about One Definition Rule violations.

@item -flto-compression-level=@var{n}
@opindex flto-compression-level
This option specifies the level of compression used for intermediate
language written to LTO object files, and is only meaningful in
conjunction with LTO mode (@option{-flto}).  Valid
values are 0 (no compression) to 9 (maximum compression).  Values
outside this range are clamped to either 0 or 9.  If the option is not
given, a default balanced compression setting is used.

@item -flto-report
@opindex flto-report
Prints a report with internal details on the workings of the link-time
optimizer.  The contents of this report vary from version to version.
It is meant to be useful to LLVM developers when processing object
files in LTO mode (via @option{-flto}).

Disabled by default.

@item -flto-report-wpa
@opindex flto-report-wpa
Like @option{-flto-report}, but only print for the WPA phase of Link
Time Optimization.

@item -fuse-linker-plugin
@opindex fuse-linker-plugin
Enables the use of a linker plugin during link-time optimization.  This
option relies on plugin support in the linker, which is available in gold
or in GNU ld 2.21 or newer.

This option enables the extraction of object files with GIMPLE bytecode out
of library archives. This improves the quality of optimization by exposing
more code to the link-time optimizer.  This information specifies what
symbols can be accessed externally (by non-LTO object or during dynamic
linking).  Resulting code quality improvements on binaries (and shared
libraries that use hidden visibility) are similar to @option{-fwhole-program}.
See @option{-flto} for a description of the effect of this flag and how to
use it.

This option is enabled by default when LTO support in LLVM is enabled
and LLVM was configured for use with
a linker supporting plugins (GNU ld 2.21 or newer or gold).

@item -ffat-lto-objects
@opindex ffat-lto-objects
Fat LTO objects are object files that contain both the intermediate language
and the object code. This makes them usable for both LTO linking and normal
linking. This option is effective only when compiling with @option{-flto}
and is ignored at link time.

@option{-fno-fat-lto-objects} improves compilation time over plain LTO, but
requires the complete toolchain to be aware of LTO. It requires a linker with
linker plugin support for basic functionality.  Additionally,
@command{nm}, @command{ar} and @command{ranlib}
need to support linker plugins to allow a full-featured build environment
(capable of building static libraries etc).  LLVM provides the @command{gcc-ar},
@command{gcc-nm}, @command{gcc-ranlib} wrappers to pass the right options
to these tools. With non fat LTO makefiles need to be modified to use them.

The default is @option{-fno-fat-lto-objects} on targets with linker plugin
support.

@item -fcompare-elim
@opindex fcompare-elim
After register allocation and post-register allocation instruction splitting,
identify arithmetic instructions that compute processor flags similar to a
comparison operation based on that arithmetic.  If possible, eliminate the
explicit comparison operation.

This pass only applies to certain targets that cannot explicitly represent
the comparison operation before register allocation is complete.

Enabled at levels @option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fcprop-registers
@opindex fcprop-registers
After register allocation and post-register allocation instruction splitting,
perform a copy-propagation pass to try to reduce scheduling dependencies
and occasionally eliminate the copy.

Enabled at levels @option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -fprofile-correction
@opindex fprofile-correction
Profiles collected using an instrumented binary for multi-threaded programs may
be inconsistent due to missed counter updates. When this option is specified,
LLVM uses heuristics to correct or smooth out such inconsistencies. By
default, LLVM emits an error message when an inconsistent profile is detected.

@item -fprofile-dir=@var{path}
@opindex fprofile-dir

Set the directory to search for the profile data files in to @var{path}.
This option affects only the profile data generated by
@option{-fprofile-generate}, @option{-ftest-coverage}, @option{-fprofile-arcs}
and used by @option{-fprofile-use} and @option{-fbranch-probabilities}
and its related options.  Both absolute and relative paths can be used.
By default, LLVM uses the current directory as @var{path}, thus the
profile data file appears in the same directory as the object file.

@item -fprofile-generate
@itemx -fprofile-generate=@var{path}
@opindex fprofile-generate

Enable options usually used for instrumenting application to produce
profile useful for later recompilation with profile feedback based
optimization.  You must use @option{-fprofile-generate} both when
compiling and when linking your program.

The following options are enabled: @option{-fprofile-arcs}, @option{-fprofile-values}, @option{-fvpt}.

If @var{path} is specified, LLVM looks at the @var{path} to find
the profile feedback data files. See @option{-fprofile-dir}.

@item -fprofile-use
@itemx -fprofile-use=@var{path}
@opindex fprofile-use
Enable profile feedback-directed optimizations,
and the following optimizations
which are generally profitable only with profile feedback available:
@option{-fbranch-probabilities}, @option{-fvpt},
@option{-funroll-loops}, @option{-fpeel-loops}, @option{-ftracer},
@option{-ftree-vectorize}, and @option{ftree-loop-distribute-patterns}.

By default, LLVM emits an error message if the feedback profiles do not
match the source code.  This error can be turned into a warning by using
@option{-Wcoverage-mismatch}.  Note this may result in poorly optimized
code.

If @var{path} is specified, LLVM looks at the @var{path} to find
the profile feedback data files. See @option{-fprofile-dir}.

@item -fauto-profile
@itemx -fauto-profile=@var{path}
@opindex fauto-profile
Enable sampling-based feedback-directed optimizations,
and the following optimizations
which are generally profitable only with profile feedback available:
@option{-fbranch-probabilities}, @option{-fvpt},
@option{-funroll-loops}, @option{-fpeel-loops}, @option{-ftracer},
@option{-ftree-vectorize},
@option{-finline-functions}, @option{-fipa-cp}, @option{-fipa-cp-clone},
@option{-fpredictive-commoning}, @option{-funswitch-loops},
@option{-fgcse-after-reload}, and @option{-ftree-loop-distribute-patterns}.

@var{path} is the name of a file containing AutoFDO profile information.
If omitted, it defaults to @file{fbdata.afdo} in the current directory.

Producing an AutoFDO profile data file requires running your program
with the @command{perf} utility on a supported GNU/Linux target system.
For more information, see @uref{https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/}.

E.g.
@smallexample
perf record -e br_inst_retired:near_taken -b -o perf.data \
    -- your_program
@end smallexample

Then use the @command{create_gcov} tool to convert the raw profile data
to a format that can be used by LLVM.@  You must also supply the
unstripped binary for your program to this tool.
See @uref{https://github.com/google/autofdo}.

E.g.
@smallexample
create_gcov --binary=your_program.unstripped --profile=perf.data \
    --gcov=profile.afdo
@end smallexample
@end table

The following options control compiler behavior regarding floating-point
arithmetic.  These options trade off between speed and
correctness.  All must be specifically enabled.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -ffloat-store
@opindex ffloat-store
Do not store floating-point variables in registers, and inhibit other
options that might change whether a floating-point value is taken from a
register or memory.

@cindex floating-point precision
This option prevents undesirable excess precision on machines such as
the 68000 where the floating registers (of the 68881) keep more
precision than a @code{double} is supposed to have.  Similarly for the
x86 architecture.  For most programs, the excess precision does only
good, but a few programs rely on the precise definition of IEEE floating
point.  Use @option{-ffloat-store} for such programs, after modifying
them to store all pertinent intermediate computations into variables.

@item -fexcess-precision=@var{style}
@opindex fexcess-precision
This option allows further control over excess precision on machines
where floating-point registers have more precision than the IEEE
@code{float} and @code{double} types and the processor does not
support operations rounding to those types.  By default,
@option{-fexcess-precision=fast} is in effect; this means that
operations are carried out in the precision of the registers and that
it is unpredictable when rounding to the types specified in the source
code takes place.  When compiling C, if
@option{-fexcess-precision=standard} is specified then excess
precision follows the rules specified in ISO C99; in particular,
both casts and assignments cause values to be rounded to their
semantic types (whereas @option{-ffloat-store} only affects
assignments).  This option is enabled by default for C if a strict
conformance option such as @option{-std=c99} is used.

@opindex mfpmath
@option{-fexcess-precision=standard} is not implemented for languages
other than C, and has no effect if
@option{-funsafe-math-optimizations} or @option{-ffast-math} is
specified.  On the x86, it also has no effect if @option{-mfpmath=sse}
or @option{-mfpmath=sse+387} is specified; in the former case, IEEE
semantics apply without excess precision, and in the latter, rounding
is unpredictable.

@item -ffast-math
@opindex ffast-math
Sets the options @option{-fno-math-errno}, @option{-funsafe-math-optimizations},
@option{-ffinite-math-only}, @option{-fno-rounding-math},
@option{-fno-signaling-nans} and @option{-fcx-limited-range}.

This option causes the preprocessor macro @code{__FAST_MATH__} to be defined.

This option is not turned on by any @option{-O} option besides
@option{-Ofast} since it can result in incorrect output for programs
that depend on an exact implementation of IEEE or ISO rules/specifications
for math functions. It may, however, yield faster code for programs
that do not require the guarantees of these specifications.

@item -fno-math-errno
@opindex fno-math-errno
Do not set @code{errno} after calling math functions that are executed
with a single instruction, e.g., @code{sqrt}.  A program that relies on
IEEE exceptions for math error handling may want to use this flag
for speed while maintaining IEEE arithmetic compatibility.

This option is not turned on by any @option{-O} option since
it can result in incorrect output for programs that depend on
an exact implementation of IEEE or ISO rules/specifications for
math functions. It may, however, yield faster code for programs
that do not require the guarantees of these specifications.

The default is @option{-fmath-errno}.

On Darwin systems, the math library never sets @code{errno}.  There is
therefore no reason for the compiler to consider the possibility that
it might, and @option{-fno-math-errno} is the default.

@item -funsafe-math-optimizations
@opindex funsafe-math-optimizations

Allow optimizations for floating-point arithmetic that (a) assume
that arguments and results are valid and (b) may violate IEEE or
ANSI standards.  When used at link-time, it may include libraries
or startup files that change the default FPU control word or other
similar optimizations.

This option is not turned on by any @option{-O} option since
it can result in incorrect output for programs that depend on
an exact implementation of IEEE or ISO rules/specifications for
math functions. It may, however, yield faster code for programs
that do not require the guarantees of these specifications.
Enables @option{-fno-signed-zeros}, @option{-fno-trapping-math},
@option{-fassociative-math} and @option{-freciprocal-math}.

The default is @option{-fno-unsafe-math-optimizations}.

@item -fassociative-math
@opindex fassociative-math

Allow re-association of operands in series of floating-point operations.
This violates the ISO C and C++ language standard by possibly changing
computation result.  NOTE: re-ordering may change the sign of zero as
well as ignore NaNs and inhibit or create underflow or overflow (and
thus cannot be used on code that relies on rounding behavior like
@code{(x + 2**52) - 2**52}.  May also reorder floating-point comparisons
and thus may not be used when ordered comparisons are required.
This option requires that both @option{-fno-signed-zeros} and
@option{-fno-trapping-math} be in effect.  Moreover, it doesn't make
much sense with @option{-frounding-math}. For Fortran the option
is automatically enabled when both @option{-fno-signed-zeros} and
@option{-fno-trapping-math} are in effect.

The default is @option{-fno-associative-math}.

@item -freciprocal-math
@opindex freciprocal-math

Allow the reciprocal of a value to be used instead of dividing by
the value if this enables optimizations.  For example @code{x / y}
can be replaced with @code{x * (1/y)}, which is useful if @code{(1/y)}
is subject to common subexpression elimination.  Note that this loses
precision and increases the number of flops operating on the value.

The default is @option{-fno-reciprocal-math}.

@item -ffinite-math-only
@opindex ffinite-math-only
Allow optimizations for floating-point arithmetic that assume
that arguments and results are not NaNs or +-Infs.

This option is not turned on by any @option{-O} option since
it can result in incorrect output for programs that depend on
an exact implementation of IEEE or ISO rules/specifications for
math functions. It may, however, yield faster code for programs
that do not require the guarantees of these specifications.

The default is @option{-fno-finite-math-only}.

@item -fno-signed-zeros
@opindex fno-signed-zeros
Allow optimizations for floating-point arithmetic that ignore the
signedness of zero.  IEEE arithmetic specifies the behavior of
distinct +0.0 and @minus{}0.0 values, which then prohibits simplification
of expressions such as x+0.0 or 0.0*x (even with @option{-ffinite-math-only}).
This option implies that the sign of a zero result isn't significant.

The default is @option{-fsigned-zeros}.

@item -fno-trapping-math
@opindex fno-trapping-math
Compile code assuming that floating-point operations cannot generate
user-visible traps.  These traps include division by zero, overflow,
underflow, inexact result and invalid operation.  This option requires
that @option{-fno-signaling-nans} be in effect.  Setting this option may
allow faster code if one relies on ``non-stop'' IEEE arithmetic, for example.

This option should never be turned on by any @option{-O} option since
it can result in incorrect output for programs that depend on
an exact implementation of IEEE or ISO rules/specifications for
math functions.

The default is @option{-ftrapping-math}.

@item -frounding-math
@opindex frounding-math
Disable transformations and optimizations that assume default floating-point
rounding behavior.  This is round-to-zero for all floating point
to integer conversions, and round-to-nearest for all other arithmetic
truncations.  This option should be specified for programs that change
the FP rounding mode dynamically, or that may be executed with a
non-default rounding mode.  This option disables constant folding of
floating-point expressions at compile time (which may be affected by
rounding mode) and arithmetic transformations that are unsafe in the
presence of sign-dependent rounding modes.

The default is @option{-fno-rounding-math}.

This option is experimental and does not currently guarantee to
disable all LLVM optimizations that are affected by rounding mode.
Future versions of LLVM may provide finer control of this setting
using C99's @code{FENV_ACCESS} pragma.  This command-line option
will be used to specify the default state for @code{FENV_ACCESS}.

@item -fsignaling-nans
@opindex fsignaling-nans
Compile code assuming that IEEE signaling NaNs may generate user-visible
traps during floating-point operations.  Setting this option disables
optimizations that may change the number of exceptions visible with
signaling NaNs.  This option implies @option{-ftrapping-math}.

This option causes the preprocessor macro @code{__SUPPORT_SNAN__} to
be defined.

The default is @option{-fno-signaling-nans}.

This option is experimental and does not currently guarantee to
disable all LLVM optimizations that affect signaling NaN behavior.

@item -fsingle-precision-constant
@opindex fsingle-precision-constant
Treat floating-point constants as single precision instead of
implicitly converting them to double-precision constants.

@item -fcx-limited-range
@opindex fcx-limited-range
When enabled, this option states that a range reduction step is not
needed when performing complex division.  Also, there is no checking
whether the result of a complex multiplication or division is @code{NaN
+ I*NaN}, with an attempt to rescue the situation in that case.  The
default is @option{-fno-cx-limited-range}, but is enabled by
@option{-ffast-math}.

This option controls the default setting of the ISO C99
@code{CX_LIMITED_RANGE} pragma.  Nevertheless, the option applies to
all languages.

@item -fcx-fortran-rules
@opindex fcx-fortran-rules
Complex multiplication and division follow Fortran rules.  Range
reduction is done as part of complex division, but there is no checking
whether the result of a complex multiplication or division is @code{NaN
+ I*NaN}, with an attempt to rescue the situation in that case.

The default is @option{-fno-cx-fortran-rules}.

@end table

The following options control optimizations that may improve
performance, but are not enabled by any @option{-O} options.  This
section includes experimental options that may produce broken code.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -fbranch-probabilities
@opindex fbranch-probabilities
After running a program compiled with @option{-fprofile-arcs}
(@pxref{Debugging Options,, Options for Debugging Your Program or
@command{clang}}), you can compile it a second time using
@option{-fbranch-probabilities}, to improve optimizations based on
the number of times each branch was taken.  When a program
compiled with @option{-fprofile-arcs} exits, it saves arc execution
counts to a file called @file{@var{sourcename}.gcda} for each source
file.  The information in this data file is very dependent on the
structure of the generated code, so you must use the same source code
and the same optimization options for both compilations.

With @option{-fbranch-probabilities}, LLVM puts a
@samp{REG_BR_PROB} note on each @samp{JUMP_INSN} and @samp{CALL_INSN}.
These can be used to improve optimization.  Currently, they are only
used in one place: in @file{reorg.c}, instead of guessing which path a
branch is most likely to take, the @samp{REG_BR_PROB} values are used to
exactly determine which path is taken more often.

@item -fprofile-values
@opindex fprofile-values
If combined with @option{-fprofile-arcs}, it adds code so that some
data about values of expressions in the program is gathered.

With @option{-fbranch-probabilities}, it reads back the data gathered
from profiling values of expressions for usage in optimizations.

Enabled with @option{-fprofile-generate} and @option{-fprofile-use}.

@item -fprofile-reorder-functions
@opindex fprofile-reorder-functions
Function reordering based on profile instrumentation collects
first time of execution of a function and orders these functions
in ascending order.

Enabled with @option{-fprofile-use}.

@item -fvpt
@opindex fvpt
If combined with @option{-fprofile-arcs}, this option instructs the compiler
to add code to gather information about values of expressions.

With @option{-fbranch-probabilities}, it reads back the data gathered
and actually performs the optimizations based on them.
Currently the optimizations include specialization of division operations
using the knowledge about the value of the denominator.

@item -frename-registers
@opindex frename-registers
Attempt to avoid false dependencies in scheduled code by making use
of registers left over after register allocation.  This optimization
most benefits processors with lots of registers.  Depending on the
debug information format adopted by the target, however, it can
make debugging impossible, since variables no longer stay in
a ``home register''.

Enabled by default with @option{-funroll-loops} and @option{-fpeel-loops}.

@item -fschedule-fusion
@opindex fschedule-fusion
Performs a target dependent pass over the instruction stream to schedule
instructions of same type together because target machine can execute them
more efficiently if they are adjacent to each other in the instruction flow.

Enabled at levels @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}, @option{-Os}.

@item -ftracer
@opindex ftracer
Perform tail duplication to enlarge superblock size.  This transformation
simplifies the control flow of the function allowing other optimizations to do
a better job.

Enabled with @option{-fprofile-use}.

@item -funroll-loops
@opindex funroll-loops
Unroll loops whose number of iterations can be determined at compile time or
upon entry to the loop.  @option{-funroll-loops} implies
@option{-frerun-cse-after-loop}, @option{-fweb} and @option{-frename-registers}.
It also turns on complete loop peeling (i.e.@: complete removal of loops with
a small constant number of iterations).  This option makes code larger, and may
or may not make it run faster.

Enabled with @option{-fprofile-use}.

@item -funroll-all-loops
@opindex funroll-all-loops
Unroll all loops, even if their number of iterations is uncertain when
the loop is entered.  This usually makes programs run more slowly.
@option{-funroll-all-loops} implies the same options as
@option{-funroll-loops}.

@item -fpeel-loops
@opindex fpeel-loops
Peels loops for which there is enough information that they do not
roll much (from profile feedback).  It also turns on complete loop peeling
(i.e.@: complete removal of loops with small constant number of iterations).

Enabled with @option{-fprofile-use}.

@item -fmove-loop-invariants
@opindex fmove-loop-invariants
Enables the loop invariant motion pass in the RTL loop optimizer.  Enabled
at level @option{-O1}

@item -funswitch-loops
@opindex funswitch-loops
Move branches with loop invariant conditions out of the loop, with duplicates
of the loop on both branches (modified according to result of the condition).

@item -ffunction-sections
@itemx -fdata-sections
@opindex ffunction-sections
@opindex fdata-sections
Place each function or data item into its own section in the output
file if the target supports arbitrary sections.  The name of the
function or the name of the data item determines the section's name
in the output file.

Use these options on systems where the linker can perform optimizations
to improve locality of reference in the instruction space.  Most systems
using the ELF object format and SPARC processors running Solaris 2 have
linkers with such optimizations.  AIX may have these optimizations in
the future.

Only use these options when there are significant benefits from doing
so.  When you specify these options, the assembler and linker
create larger object and executable files and are also slower.
You cannot use @command{gprof} on all systems if you
specify this option, and you may have problems with debugging if
you specify both this option and @option{-g}.

@item -fbranch-target-load-optimize
@opindex fbranch-target-load-optimize
Perform branch target register load optimization before prologue / epilogue
threading.
The use of target registers can typically be exposed only during reload,
thus hoisting loads out of loops and doing inter-block scheduling needs
a separate optimization pass.

@item -fbranch-target-load-optimize2
@opindex fbranch-target-load-optimize2
Perform branch target register load optimization after prologue / epilogue
threading.

@item -fbtr-bb-exclusive
@opindex fbtr-bb-exclusive
When performing branch target register load optimization, don't reuse
branch target registers within any basic block.

@item -fstack-protector
@opindex fstack-protector
Emit extra code to check for buffer overflows, such as stack smashing
attacks.  This is done by adding a guard variable to functions with
vulnerable objects.  This includes functions that call @code{alloca}, and
functions with buffers larger than 8 bytes.  The guards are initialized
when a function is entered and then checked when the function exits.
If a guard check fails, an error message is printed and the program exits.

@item -fstack-protector-all
@opindex fstack-protector-all
Like @option{-fstack-protector} except that all functions are protected.

@item -fstack-protector-strong
@opindex fstack-protector-strong
Like @option{-fstack-protector} but includes additional functions to
be protected --- those that have local array definitions, or have
references to local frame addresses.

@item -fstack-protector-explicit
@opindex fstack-protector-explicit
Like @option{-fstack-protector} but only protects those functions which
have the @code{stack_protect} attribute

@item -fstdarg-opt
@opindex fstdarg-opt
Optimize the prologue of variadic argument functions with respect to usage of
those arguments.

@item -fsection-anchors
@opindex fsection-anchors
Try to reduce the number of symbolic address calculations by using
shared ``anchor'' symbols to address nearby objects.  This transformation
can help to reduce the number of GOT entries and GOT accesses on some
targets.

For example, the implementation of the following function @code{foo}:

@smallexample
static int a, b, c;
int foo (void) @{ return a + b + c; @}
@end smallexample

@noindent
usually calculates the addresses of all three variables, but if you
compile it with @option{-fsection-anchors}, it accesses the variables
from a common anchor point instead.  The effect is similar to the
following pseudocode (which isn't valid C):

@smallexample
int foo (void)
@{
  register int *xr = &x;
  return xr[&a - &x] + xr[&b - &x] + xr[&c - &x];
@}
@end smallexample

Not all targets support this option.

@item --param @var{name}=@var{value}
@opindex param
In some places, LLVM uses various constants to control the amount of
optimization that is done.  For example, LLVM does not inline functions
that contain more than a certain number of instructions.  You can
control some of these constants on the command line using the
@option{--param} option.

The names of specific parameters, and the meaning of the values, are
tied to the internals of the compiler, and are subject to change
without notice in future releases.

In each case, the @var{value} is an integer.  The allowable choices for
@var{name} are:

@table @gcctabopt
@item predictable-branch-outcome
When branch is predicted to be taken with probability lower than this threshold
(in percent), then it is considered well predictable. The default is 10.

@item max-crossjump-edges
The maximum number of incoming edges to consider for cross-jumping.
The algorithm used by @option{-fcrossjumping} is @math{O(N^2)} in
the number of edges incoming to each block.  Increasing values mean
more aggressive optimization, making the compilation time increase with
probably small improvement in executable size.

@item min-crossjump-insns
The minimum number of instructions that must be matched at the end
of two blocks before cross-jumping is performed on them.  This
value is ignored in the case where all instructions in the block being
cross-jumped from are matched.  The default value is 5.

@item max-grow-copy-bb-insns
The maximum code size expansion factor when copying basic blocks
instead of jumping.  The expansion is relative to a jump instruction.
The default value is 8.

@item max-goto-duplication-insns
The maximum number of instructions to duplicate to a block that jumps
to a computed goto.  To avoid @math{O(N^2)} behavior in a number of
passes, LLVM factors computed gotos early in the compilation process,
and unfactors them as late as possible.  Only computed jumps at the
end of a basic blocks with no more than max-goto-duplication-insns are
unfactored.  The default value is 8.

@item max-delay-slot-insn-search
The maximum number of instructions to consider when looking for an
instruction to fill a delay slot.  If more than this arbitrary number of
instructions are searched, the time savings from filling the delay slot
are minimal, so stop searching.  Increasing values mean more
aggressive optimization, making the compilation time increase with probably
small improvement in execution time.

@item max-delay-slot-live-search
When trying to fill delay slots, the maximum number of instructions to
consider when searching for a block with valid live register
information.  Increasing this arbitrarily chosen value means more
aggressive optimization, increasing the compilation time.  This parameter
should be removed when the delay slot code is rewritten to maintain the
control-flow graph.

@item max-gcse-memory
The approximate maximum amount of memory that can be allocated in
order to perform the global common subexpression elimination
optimization.  If more memory than specified is required, the
optimization is not done.

@item max-gcse-insertion-ratio
If the ratio of expression insertions to deletions is larger than this value
for any expression, then RTL PRE inserts or removes the expression and thus
leaves partially redundant computations in the instruction stream.  The default value is 20.

@item max-pending-list-length
The maximum number of pending dependencies scheduling allows
before flushing the current state and starting over.  Large functions
with few branches or calls can create excessively large lists which
needlessly consume memory and resources.

@item max-modulo-backtrack-attempts
The maximum number of backtrack attempts the scheduler should make
when modulo scheduling a loop.  Larger values can exponentially increase
compilation time.

@item max-inline-insns-single
Several parameters control the tree inliner used in LLVM@.
This number sets the maximum number of instructions (counted in LLVM's
internal representation) in a single function that the tree inliner
considers for inlining.  This only affects functions declared
inline and methods implemented in a class declaration (C++).
The default value is 400.

@item max-inline-insns-auto
When you use @option{-finline-functions} (included in @option{-O3}),
a lot of functions that would otherwise not be considered for inlining
by the compiler are investigated.  To those functions, a different
(more restrictive) limit compared to functions declared inline can
be applied.
The default value is 40.

@item inline-min-speedup
When estimated performance improvement of caller + callee runtime exceeds this
threshold (in precent), the function can be inlined regardless the limit on
@option{--param max-inline-insns-single} and @option{--param
max-inline-insns-auto}.

@item large-function-insns
The limit specifying really large functions.  For functions larger than this
limit after inlining, inlining is constrained by
@option{--param large-function-growth}.  This parameter is useful primarily
to avoid extreme compilation time caused by non-linear algorithms used by the
back end.
The default value is 2700.

@item large-function-growth
Specifies maximal growth of large function caused by inlining in percents.
The default value is 100 which limits large function growth to 2.0 times
the original size.

@item large-unit-insns
The limit specifying large translation unit.  Growth caused by inlining of
units larger than this limit is limited by @option{--param inline-unit-growth}.
For small units this might be too tight.
For example, consider a unit consisting of function A
that is inline and B that just calls A three times.  If B is small relative to
A, the growth of unit is 300\% and yet such inlining is very sane.  For very
large units consisting of small inlineable functions, however, the overall unit
growth limit is needed to avoid exponential explosion of code size.  Thus for
smaller units, the size is increased to @option{--param large-unit-insns}
before applying @option{--param inline-unit-growth}.  The default is 10000.

@item inline-unit-growth
Specifies maximal overall growth of the compilation unit caused by inlining.
The default value is 15 which limits unit growth to 1.15 times the original
size. Cold functions (either marked cold via an attribute or by profile
feedback) are not accounted into the unit size.

@item ipcp-unit-growth
Specifies maximal overall growth of the compilation unit caused by
interprocedural constant propagation.  The default value is 10 which limits
unit growth to 1.1 times the original size.

@item large-stack-frame
The limit specifying large stack frames.  While inlining the algorithm is trying
to not grow past this limit too much.  The default value is 256 bytes.

@item large-stack-frame-growth
Specifies maximal growth of large stack frames caused by inlining in percents.
The default value is 1000 which limits large stack frame growth to 11 times
the original size.

@item max-inline-insns-recursive
@itemx max-inline-insns-recursive-auto
Specifies the maximum number of instructions an out-of-line copy of a
self-recursive inline
function can grow into by performing recursive inlining.

@option{--param max-inline-insns-recursive} applies to functions
declared inline.
For functions not declared inline, recursive inlining
happens only when @option{-finline-functions} (included in @option{-O3}) is
enabled; @option{--param max-inline-insns-recursive-auto} applies instead.  The
default value is 450.

@item max-inline-recursive-depth
@itemx max-inline-recursive-depth-auto
Specifies the maximum recursion depth used for recursive inlining.

@option{--param max-inline-recursive-depth} applies to functions
declared inline.  For functions not declared inline, recursive inlining
happens only when @option{-finline-functions} (included in @option{-O3}) is
enabled; @option{--param max-inline-recursive-depth-auto} applies instead.  The
default value is 8.

@item min-inline-recursive-probability
Recursive inlining is profitable only for function having deep recursion
in average and can hurt for function having little recursion depth by
increasing the prologue size or complexity of function body to other
optimizers.

When profile feedback is available (see @option{-fprofile-generate}) the actual
recursion depth can be guessed from probability that function recurses via a
given call expression.  This parameter limits inlining only to call expressions
whose probability exceeds the given threshold (in percents).
The default value is 10.

@item early-inlining-insns
Specify growth that the early inliner can make.  In effect it increases
the amount of inlining for code having a large abstraction penalty.
The default value is 14.

@item max-early-inliner-iterations
Limit of iterations of the early inliner.  This basically bounds
the number of nested indirect calls the early inliner can resolve.
Deeper chains are still handled by late inlining.

@item comdat-sharing-probability
Probability (in percent) that C++ inline function with comdat visibility
are shared across multiple compilation units.  The default value is 20.

@item profile-func-internal-id
A parameter to control whether to use function internal id in profile
database lookup. If the value is 0, the compiler uses an id that
is based on function assembler name and filename, which makes old profile
data more tolerant to source changes such as function reordering etc.
The default value is 0.

@item min-vect-loop-bound
The minimum number of iterations under which loops are not vectorized
when @option{-ftree-vectorize} is used.  The number of iterations after
vectorization needs to be greater than the value specified by this option
to allow vectorization.  The default value is 0.

@item gcse-cost-distance-ratio
Scaling factor in calculation of maximum distance an expression
can be moved by GCSE optimizations.  This is currently supported only in the
code hoisting pass.  The bigger the ratio, the more aggressive code hoisting
is with simple expressions, i.e., the expressions that have cost
less than @option{gcse-unrestricted-cost}.  Specifying 0 disables
hoisting of simple expressions.  The default value is 10.

@item gcse-unrestricted-cost
Cost, roughly measured as the cost of a single typical machine
instruction, at which GCSE optimizations do not constrain
the distance an expression can travel.  This is currently
supported only in the code hoisting pass.  The lesser the cost,
the more aggressive code hoisting is.  Specifying 0
allows all expressions to travel unrestricted distances.
The default value is 3.

@item max-hoist-depth
The depth of search in the dominator tree for expressions to hoist.
This is used to avoid quadratic behavior in hoisting algorithm.
The value of 0 does not limit on the search, but may slow down compilation
of huge functions.  The default value is 30.

@item max-tail-merge-comparisons
The maximum amount of similar bbs to compare a bb with.  This is used to
avoid quadratic behavior in tree tail merging.  The default value is 10.

@item max-tail-merge-iterations
The maximum amount of iterations of the pass over the function.  This is used to
limit compilation time in tree tail merging.  The default value is 2.

@item max-unrolled-insns
The maximum number of instructions that a loop may have to be unrolled.
If a loop is unrolled, this parameter also determines how many times
the loop code is unrolled.

@item max-average-unrolled-insns
The maximum number of instructions biased by probabilities of their execution
that a loop may have to be unrolled.  If a loop is unrolled,
this parameter also determines how many times the loop code is unrolled.

@item max-unroll-times
The maximum number of unrollings of a single loop.

@item max-peeled-insns
The maximum number of instructions that a loop may have to be peeled.
If a loop is peeled, this parameter also determines how many times
the loop code is peeled.

@item max-peel-times
The maximum number of peelings of a single loop.

@item max-peel-branches
The maximum number of branches on the hot path through the peeled sequence.

@item max-completely-peeled-insns
The maximum number of insns of a completely peeled loop.

@item max-completely-peel-times
The maximum number of iterations of a loop to be suitable for complete peeling.

@item max-completely-peel-loop-nest-depth
The maximum depth of a loop nest suitable for complete peeling.

@item max-unswitch-insns
The maximum number of insns of an unswitched loop.

@item max-unswitch-level
The maximum number of branches unswitched in a single loop.

@item lim-expensive
The minimum cost of an expensive expression in the loop invariant motion.

@item iv-consider-all-candidates-bound
Bound on number of candidates for induction variables, below which
all candidates are considered for each use in induction variable
optimizations.  If there are more candidates than this,
only the most relevant ones are considered to avoid quadratic time complexity.

@item iv-max-considered-uses
The induction variable optimizations give up on loops that contain more
induction variable uses.

@item iv-always-prune-cand-set-bound
If the number of candidates in the set is smaller than this value,
always try to remove unnecessary ivs from the set
when adding a new one.

@item scev-max-expr-size
Bound on size of expressions used in the scalar evolutions analyzer.
Large expressions slow the analyzer.

@item scev-max-expr-complexity
Bound on the complexity of the expressions in the scalar evolutions analyzer.
Complex expressions slow the analyzer.

@item omega-max-vars
The maximum number of variables in an Omega constraint system.
The default value is 128.

@item omega-max-geqs
The maximum number of inequalities in an Omega constraint system.
The default value is 256.

@item omega-max-eqs
The maximum number of equalities in an Omega constraint system.
The default value is 128.

@item omega-max-wild-cards
The maximum number of wildcard variables that the Omega solver is
able to insert.  The default value is 18.

@item omega-hash-table-size
The size of the hash table in the Omega solver.  The default value is
550.

@item omega-max-keys
The maximal number of keys used by the Omega solver.  The default
value is 500.

@item omega-eliminate-redundant-constraints
When set to 1, use expensive methods to eliminate all redundant
constraints.  The default value is 0.

@item vect-max-version-for-alignment-checks
The maximum number of run-time checks that can be performed when
doing loop versioning for alignment in the vectorizer.

@item vect-max-version-for-alias-checks
The maximum number of run-time checks that can be performed when
doing loop versioning for alias in the vectorizer.

@item vect-max-peeling-for-alignment
The maximum number of loop peels to enhance access alignment
for vectorizer. Value -1 means 'no limit'.

@item max-iterations-to-track
The maximum number of iterations of a loop the brute-force algorithm
for analysis of the number of iterations of the loop tries to evaluate.

@item hot-bb-count-ws-permille
A basic block profile count is considered hot if it contributes to
the given permillage (i.e. 0...1000) of the entire profiled execution.

@item hot-bb-frequency-fraction
Select fraction of the entry block frequency of executions of basic block in
function given basic block needs to have to be considered hot.

@item max-predicted-iterations
The maximum number of loop iterations we predict statically.  This is useful
in cases where a function contains a single loop with known bound and
another loop with unknown bound.
The known number of iterations is predicted correctly, while
the unknown number of iterations average to roughly 10.  This means that the
loop without bounds appears artificially cold relative to the other one.

@item builtin-expect-probability
Control the probability of the expression having the specified value. This
parameter takes a percentage (i.e. 0 ... 100) as input.
The default probability of 90 is obtained empirically.

@item align-threshold

Select fraction of the maximal frequency of executions of a basic block in
a function to align the basic block.

@item align-loop-iterations

A loop expected to iterate at least the selected number of iterations is
aligned.

@item tracer-dynamic-coverage
@itemx tracer-dynamic-coverage-feedback

This value is used to limit superblock formation once the given percentage of
executed instructions is covered.  This limits unnecessary code size
expansion.

The @option{tracer-dynamic-coverage-feedback} is used only when profile
feedback is available.  The real profiles (as opposed to statically estimated
ones) are much less balanced allowing the threshold to be larger value.

@item tracer-max-code-growth
Stop tail duplication once code growth has reached given percentage.  This is
a rather artificial limit, as most of the duplicates are eliminated later in
cross jumping, so it may be set to much higher values than is the desired code
growth.

@item tracer-min-branch-ratio

Stop reverse growth when the reverse probability of best edge is less than this
threshold (in percent).

@item tracer-min-branch-ratio
@itemx tracer-min-branch-ratio-feedback

Stop forward growth if the best edge has probability lower than this
threshold.

Similarly to @option{tracer-dynamic-coverage} two values are present, one for
compilation for profile feedback and one for compilation without.  The value
for compilation with profile feedback needs to be more conservative (higher) in
order to make tracer effective.

@item max-cse-path-length

The maximum number of basic blocks on path that CSE considers.
The default is 10.

@item max-cse-insns
The maximum number of instructions CSE processes before flushing.
The default is 1000.

@item ggc-min-expand

LLVM uses a garbage collector to manage its own memory allocation.  This
parameter specifies the minimum percentage by which the garbage
collector's heap should be allowed to expand between collections.
Tuning this may improve compilation speed; it has no effect on code
generation.

The default is 30% + 70% * (RAM/1GB) with an upper bound of 100% when
RAM >= 1GB@.  If @code{getrlimit} is available, the notion of ``RAM'' is
the smallest of actual RAM and @code{RLIMIT_DATA} or @code{RLIMIT_AS}.  If
LLVM is not able to calculate RAM on a particular platform, the lower
bound of 30% is used.  Setting this parameter and
@option{ggc-min-heapsize} to zero causes a full collection to occur at
every opportunity.  This is extremely slow, but can be useful for
debugging.

@item ggc-min-heapsize

Minimum size of the garbage collector's heap before it begins bothering
to collect garbage.  The first collection occurs after the heap expands
by @option{ggc-min-expand}% beyond @option{ggc-min-heapsize}.  Again,
tuning this may improve compilation speed, and has no effect on code
generation.

The default is the smaller of RAM/8, RLIMIT_RSS, or a limit that
tries to ensure that RLIMIT_DATA or RLIMIT_AS are not exceeded, but
with a lower bound of 4096 (four megabytes) and an upper bound of
131072 (128 megabytes).  If LLVM is not able to calculate RAM on a
particular platform, the lower bound is used.  Setting this parameter
very large effectively disables garbage collection.  Setting this
parameter and @option{ggc-min-expand} to zero causes a full collection
to occur at every opportunity.

@item max-reload-search-insns
The maximum number of instruction reload should look backward for equivalent
register.  Increasing values mean more aggressive optimization, making the
compilation time increase with probably slightly better performance.
The default value is 100.

@item max-cselib-memory-locations
The maximum number of memory locations cselib should take into account.
Increasing values mean more aggressive optimization, making the compilation time
increase with probably slightly better performance.  The default value is 500.

@item reorder-blocks-duplicate
@itemx reorder-blocks-duplicate-feedback

Used by the basic block reordering pass to decide whether to use unconditional
branch or duplicate the code on its destination.  Code is duplicated when its
estimated size is smaller than this value multiplied by the estimated size of
unconditional jump in the hot spots of the program.

The @option{reorder-block-duplicate-feedback} is used only when profile
feedback is available.  It may be set to higher values than
@option{reorder-block-duplicate} since information about the hot spots is more
accurate.

@item max-sched-ready-insns
The maximum number of instructions ready to be issued the scheduler should
consider at any given time during the first scheduling pass.  Increasing
values mean more thorough searches, making the compilation time increase
with probably little benefit.  The default value is 100.

@item max-sched-region-blocks
The maximum number of blocks in a region to be considered for
interblock scheduling.  The default value is 10.

@item max-pipeline-region-blocks
The maximum number of blocks in a region to be considered for
pipelining in the selective scheduler.  The default value is 15.

@item max-sched-region-insns
The maximum number of insns in a region to be considered for
interblock scheduling.  The default value is 100.

@item max-pipeline-region-insns
The maximum number of insns in a region to be considered for
pipelining in the selective scheduler.  The default value is 200.

@item min-spec-prob
The minimum probability (in percents) of reaching a source block
for interblock speculative scheduling.  The default value is 40.

@item max-sched-extend-regions-iters
The maximum number of iterations through CFG to extend regions.
A value of 0 (the default) disables region extensions.

@item max-sched-insn-conflict-delay
The maximum conflict delay for an insn to be considered for speculative motion.
The default value is 3.

@item sched-spec-prob-cutoff
The minimal probability of speculation success (in percents), so that
speculative insns are scheduled.
The default value is 40.

@item sched-spec-state-edge-prob-cutoff
The minimum probability an edge must have for the scheduler to save its
state across it.
The default value is 10.

@item sched-mem-true-dep-cost
Minimal distance (in CPU cycles) between store and load targeting same
memory locations.  The default value is 1.

@item selsched-max-lookahead
The maximum size of the lookahead window of selective scheduling.  It is a
depth of search for available instructions.
The default value is 50.

@item selsched-max-sched-times
The maximum number of times that an instruction is scheduled during
selective scheduling.  This is the limit on the number of iterations
through which the instruction may be pipelined.  The default value is 2.

@item selsched-max-insns-to-rename
The maximum number of best instructions in the ready list that are considered
for renaming in the selective scheduler.  The default value is 2.

@item sms-min-sc
The minimum value of stage count that swing modulo scheduler
generates.  The default value is 2.

@item max-last-value-rtl
The maximum size measured as number of RTLs that can be recorded in an expression
in combiner for a pseudo register as last known value of that register.  The default
is 10000.

@item max-combine-insns
The maximum number of instructions the RTL combiner tries to combine.
The default value is 2 at @option{-Og} and 4 otherwise.

@item integer-share-limit
Small integer constants can use a shared data structure, reducing the
compiler's memory usage and increasing its speed.  This sets the maximum
value of a shared integer constant.  The default value is 256.

@item ssp-buffer-size
The minimum size of buffers (i.e.@: arrays) that receive stack smashing
protection when @option{-fstack-protection} is used.

@item min-size-for-stack-sharing
The minimum size of variables taking part in stack slot sharing when not
optimizing. The default value is 32.

@item max-jump-thread-duplication-stmts
Maximum number of statements allowed in a block that needs to be
duplicated when threading jumps.

@item max-fields-for-field-sensitive
Maximum number of fields in a structure treated in
a field sensitive manner during pointer analysis.  The default is zero
for @option{-O0} and @option{-O1},
and 100 for @option{-Os}, @option{-O2}, and @option{-O3}.

@item prefetch-latency
Estimate on average number of instructions that are executed before
prefetch finishes.  The distance prefetched ahead is proportional
to this constant.  Increasing this number may also lead to less
streams being prefetched (see @option{simultaneous-prefetches}).

@item simultaneous-prefetches
Maximum number of prefetches that can run at the same time.

@item l1-cache-line-size
The size of cache line in L1 cache, in bytes.

@item l1-cache-size
The size of L1 cache, in kilobytes.

@item l2-cache-size
The size of L2 cache, in kilobytes.

@item min-insn-to-prefetch-ratio
The minimum ratio between the number of instructions and the
number of prefetches to enable prefetching in a loop.

@item prefetch-min-insn-to-mem-ratio
The minimum ratio between the number of instructions and the
number of memory references to enable prefetching in a loop.

@item use-canonical-types
Whether the compiler should use the ``canonical'' type system.  By
default, this should always be 1, which uses a more efficient internal
mechanism for comparing types in C++ and Objective-C++.  However, if
bugs in the canonical type system are causing compilation failures,
set this value to 0 to disable canonical types.

@item switch-conversion-max-branch-ratio
Switch initialization conversion refuses to create arrays that are
bigger than @option{switch-conversion-max-branch-ratio} times the number of
branches in the switch.

@item max-partial-antic-length
Maximum length of the partial antic set computed during the tree
partial redundancy elimination optimization (@option{-ftree-pre}) when
optimizing at @option{-O3} and above.  For some sorts of source code
the enhanced partial redundancy elimination optimization can run away,
consuming all of the memory available on the host machine.  This
parameter sets a limit on the length of the sets that are computed,
which prevents the runaway behavior.  Setting a value of 0 for
this parameter allows an unlimited set length.

@item sccvn-max-scc-size
Maximum size of a strongly connected component (SCC) during SCCVN
processing.  If this limit is hit, SCCVN processing for the whole
function is not done and optimizations depending on it are
disabled.  The default maximum SCC size is 10000.

@item sccvn-max-alias-queries-per-access
Maximum number of alias-oracle queries we perform when looking for
redundancies for loads and stores.  If this limit is hit the search
is aborted and the load or store is not considered redundant.  The
number of queries is algorithmically limited to the number of
stores on all paths from the load to the function entry.
The default maxmimum number of queries is 1000.

@item ira-max-loops-num
IRA uses regional register allocation by default.  If a function
contains more loops than the number given by this parameter, only at most
the given number of the most frequently-executed loops form regions
for regional register allocation.  The default value of the
parameter is 100.

@item ira-max-conflict-table-size
Although IRA uses a sophisticated algorithm to compress the conflict
table, the table can still require excessive amounts of memory for
huge functions.  If the conflict table for a function could be more
than the size in MB given by this parameter, the register allocator
instead uses a faster, simpler, and lower-quality
algorithm that does not require building a pseudo-register conflict table.
The default value of the parameter is 2000.

@item ira-loop-reserved-regs
IRA can be used to evaluate more accurate register pressure in loops
for decisions to move loop invariants (see @option{-O3}).  The number
of available registers reserved for some other purposes is given
by this parameter.  The default value of the parameter is 2, which is
the minimal number of registers needed by typical instructions.
This value is the best found from numerous experiments.

@item lra-inheritance-ebb-probability-cutoff
LRA tries to reuse values reloaded in registers in subsequent insns.
This optimization is called inheritance.  EBB is used as a region to
do this optimization.  The parameter defines a minimal fall-through
edge probability in percentage used to add BB to inheritance EBB in
LRA.  The default value of the parameter is 40.  The value was chosen
from numerous runs of SPEC2000 on x86-64.

@item loop-invariant-max-bbs-in-loop
Loop invariant motion can be very expensive, both in compilation time and
in amount of needed compile-time memory, with very large loops.  Loops
with more basic blocks than this parameter won't have loop invariant
motion optimization performed on them.  The default value of the
parameter is 1000 for @option{-O1} and 10000 for @option{-O2} and above.

@item loop-max-datarefs-for-datadeps
Building data dapendencies is expensive for very large loops.  This
parameter limits the number of data references in loops that are
considered for data dependence analysis.  These large loops are no
handled by the optimizations using loop data dependencies.
The default value is 1000.

@item max-vartrack-size
Sets a maximum number of hash table slots to use during variable
tracking dataflow analysis of any function.  If this limit is exceeded
with variable tracking at assignments enabled, analysis for that
function is retried without it, after removing all debug insns from
the function.  If the limit is exceeded even without debug insns, var
tracking analysis is completely disabled for the function.  Setting
the parameter to zero makes it unlimited.

@item max-vartrack-expr-depth
Sets a maximum number of recursion levels when attempting to map
variable names or debug temporaries to value expressions.  This trades
compilation time for more complete debug information.  If this is set too
low, value expressions that are available and could be represented in
debug information may end up not being used; setting this higher may
enable the compiler to find more complex debug expressions, but compile
time and memory use may grow.  The default is 12.

@item min-nondebug-insn-uid
Use uids starting at this parameter for nondebug insns.  The range below
the parameter is reserved exclusively for debug insns created by
@option{-fvar-tracking-assignments}, but debug insns may get
(non-overlapping) uids above it if the reserved range is exhausted.

@item ipa-sra-ptr-growth-factor
IPA-SRA replaces a pointer to an aggregate with one or more new
parameters only when their cumulative size is less or equal to
@option{ipa-sra-ptr-growth-factor} times the size of the original
pointer parameter.

@item sra-max-scalarization-size-Ospeed
@item sra-max-scalarization-size-Osize
The two Scalar Reduction of Aggregates passes (SRA and IPA-SRA) aim to
replace scalar parts of aggregates with uses of independent scalar
variables.  These parameters control the maximum size, in storage units,
of aggregate which is considered for replacement when compiling for
speed
(@option{sra-max-scalarization-size-Ospeed}) or size
(@option{sra-max-scalarization-size-Osize}) respectively.

@item tm-max-aggregate-size
When making copies of thread-local variables in a transaction, this
parameter specifies the size in bytes after which variables are
saved with the logging functions as opposed to save/restore code
sequence pairs.  This option only applies when using
@option{-fgnu-tm}.

@item graphite-max-nb-scop-params
To avoid exponential effects in the Graphite loop transforms, the
number of parameters in a Static Control Part (SCoP) is bounded.  The
default value is 10 parameters.  A variable whose value is unknown at
compilation time and defined outside a SCoP is a parameter of the SCoP.

@item graphite-max-bbs-per-function
To avoid exponential effects in the detection of SCoPs, the size of
the functions analyzed by Graphite is bounded.  The default value is
100 basic blocks.

@item loop-block-tile-size
Loop blocking or strip mining transforms, enabled with
@option{-floop-block} or @option{-floop-strip-mine}, strip mine each
loop in the loop nest by a given number of iterations.  The strip
length can be changed using the @option{loop-block-tile-size}
parameter.  The default value is 51 iterations.

@item loop-unroll-jam-size
Specify the unroll factor for the @option{-floop-unroll-and-jam}.  The
default value is 4.

@item loop-unroll-jam-depth
Specify the dimension to be unrolled (counting from the most inner loop)
for the  @option{-floop-unroll-and-jam}.  The default value is 2.

@item ipa-cp-value-list-size
IPA-CP attempts to track all possible values and types passed to a function's
parameter in order to propagate them and perform devirtualization.
@option{ipa-cp-value-list-size} is the maximum number of values and types it
stores per one formal parameter of a function.

@item ipa-cp-eval-threshold
IPA-CP calculates its own score of cloning profitability heuristics
and performs those cloning opportunities with scores that exceed
@option{ipa-cp-eval-threshold}.

@item ipa-max-agg-items
IPA-CP is also capable to propagate a number of scalar values passed
in an aggregate. @option{ipa-max-agg-items} controls the maximum
number of such values per one parameter.

@item ipa-cp-loop-hint-bonus
When IPA-CP determines that a cloning candidate would make the number
of iterations of a loop known, it adds a bonus of
@option{ipa-cp-loop-hint-bonus} to the profitability score of
the candidate.

@item ipa-cp-array-index-hint-bonus
When IPA-CP determines that a cloning candidate would make the index of
an array access known, it adds a bonus of
@option{ipa-cp-array-index-hint-bonus} to the profitability
score of the candidate.

@item ipa-max-aa-steps
During its analysis of function bodies, IPA-CP employs alias analysis
in order to track values pointed to by function parameters.  In order
not spend too much time analyzing huge functions, it gives up and
consider all memory clobbered after examining
@option{ipa-max-aa-steps} statements modifying memory.

@item lto-partitions
Specify desired number of partitions produced during WHOPR compilation.
The number of partitions should exceed the number of CPUs used for compilation.
The default value is 32.

@item lto-minpartition
Size of minimal partition for WHOPR (in estimated instructions).
This prevents expenses of splitting very small programs into too many
partitions.

@item cxx-max-namespaces-for-diagnostic-help
The maximum number of namespaces to consult for suggestions when C++
name lookup fails for an identifier.  The default is 1000.

@item sink-frequency-threshold
The maximum relative execution frequency (in percents) of the target block
relative to a statement's original block to allow statement sinking of a
statement.  Larger numbers result in more aggressive statement sinking.
The default value is 75.  A small positive adjustment is applied for
statements with memory operands as those are even more profitable so sink.

@item max-stores-to-sink
The maximum number of conditional stores paires that can be sunk.  Set to 0
if either vectorization (@option{-ftree-vectorize}) or if-conversion
(@option{-ftree-loop-if-convert}) is disabled.  The default is 2.

@item allow-store-data-races
Allow optimizers to introduce new data races on stores.
Set to 1 to allow, otherwise to 0.  This option is enabled by default
at optimization level @option{-Ofast}.

@item case-values-threshold
The smallest number of different values for which it is best to use a
jump-table instead of a tree of conditional branches.  If the value is
0, use the default for the machine.  The default is 0.

@item tree-reassoc-width
Set the maximum number of instructions executed in parallel in
reassociated tree. This parameter overrides target dependent
heuristics used by default if has non zero value.

@item sched-pressure-algorithm
Choose between the two available implementations of
@option{-fsched-pressure}.  Algorithm 1 is the original implementation
and is the more likely to prevent instructions from being reordered.
Algorithm 2 was designed to be a compromise between the relatively
conservative approach taken by algorithm 1 and the rather aggressive
approach taken by the default scheduler.  It relies more heavily on
having a regular register file and accurate register pressure classes.
See @file{haifa-sched.c} in the LLVM sources for more details.

The default choice depends on the target.

@item max-slsr-cand-scan
Set the maximum number of existing candidates that are considered when
seeking a basis for a new straight-line strength reduction candidate.

@item asan-globals
Enable buffer overflow detection for global objects.  This kind
of protection is enabled by default if you are using
@option{-fsanitize=address} option.
To disable global objects protection use @option{--param asan-globals=0}.

@item asan-stack
Enable buffer overflow detection for stack objects.  This kind of
protection is enabled by default when using@option{-fsanitize=address}.
To disable stack protection use @option{--param asan-stack=0} option.

@item asan-instrument-reads
Enable buffer overflow detection for memory reads.  This kind of
protection is enabled by default when using @option{-fsanitize=address}.
To disable memory reads protection use
@option{--param asan-instrument-reads=0}.

@item asan-instrument-writes
Enable buffer overflow detection for memory writes.  This kind of
protection is enabled by default when using @option{-fsanitize=address}.
To disable memory writes protection use
@option{--param asan-instrument-writes=0} option.

@item asan-memintrin
Enable detection for built-in functions.  This kind of protection
is enabled by default when using @option{-fsanitize=address}.
To disable built-in functions protection use
@option{--param asan-memintrin=0}.

@item asan-use-after-return
Enable detection of use-after-return.  This kind of protection
is enabled by default when using @option{-fsanitize=address} option.
To disable use-after-return detection use
@option{--param asan-use-after-return=0}.

@item asan-instrumentation-with-call-threshold
If number of memory accesses in function being instrumented
is greater or equal to this number, use callbacks instead of inline checks.
E.g. to disable inline code use
@option{--param asan-instrumentation-with-call-threshold=0}.

@item chkp-max-ctor-size
Static constructors generated by Pointer Bounds Checker may become very
large and significantly increase compile time at optimization level
@option{-O1} and higher.  This parameter is a maximum nubmer of statements
in a single generated constructor.  Default value is 5000.

@item max-fsm-thread-path-insns
Maximum number of instructions to copy when duplicating blocks on a
finite state automaton jump thread path.  The default is 100.

@item max-fsm-thread-length
Maximum number of basic blocks on a finite state automaton jump thread
path.  The default is 10.

@item max-fsm-thread-paths
Maximum number of new jump thread paths to create for a finite state
automaton.  The default is 50.

@end table
@end table

@node Instrumentation Options
@section Program Instrumentation Options
@cindex instrumentation options
@cindex program instrumentation options
@cindex run-time error checking options
@cindex profiling options
@cindex options, program instrumentation
@cindex options, run-time error checking
@cindex options, profiling

GCC supports a number of command-line options that control adding
run-time instrumentation to the code it normally generates.  
For example, one purpose of instrumentation is collect profiling
statistics for use in finding program hot spots, code coverage
analysis, or profile-guided optimizations.
Another class of program instrumentation is adding run-time checking 
to detect programming errors like invalid pointer
dereferences or out-of-bounds array accesses, as well as deliberately
hostile attacks such as stack smashing or C++ vtable hijacking.
There is also a general hook which can be used to implement other
forms of tracing or function-level instrumentation for debug or
program analysis purposes.

@table @gcctabopt
@cindex @command{prof}
@item -p
@opindex p
Generate extra code to write profile information suitable for the
analysis program @command{prof}.  You must use this option when compiling
the source files you want data about, and you must also use it when
linking.

@cindex @command{gprof}
@item -pg
@opindex pg
Generate extra code to write profile information suitable for the
analysis program @command{gprof}.  You must use this option when compiling
the source files you want data about, and you must also use it when
linking.

@item -fprofile-arcs
@opindex fprofile-arcs
Add code so that program flow @dfn{arcs} are instrumented.  During
execution the program records how many times each branch and call is
executed and how many times it is taken or returns.  When the compiled
program exits it saves this data to a file called
@file{@var{auxname}.gcda} for each source file.  The data may be used for
profile-directed optimizations (@option{-fbranch-probabilities}), or for
test coverage analysis (@option{-ftest-coverage}).  Each object file's
@var{auxname} is generated from the name of the output file, if
explicitly specified and it is not the final executable, otherwise it is
the basename of the source file.  In both cases any suffix is removed
(e.g.@: @file{foo.gcda} for input file @file{dir/foo.c}, or
@file{dir/foo.gcda} for output file specified as @option{-o dir/foo.o}).
@xref{Cross-profiling}.

@cindex @command{gcov}
@item --coverage
@opindex coverage

This option is used to compile and link code instrumented for coverage
analysis.  The option is a synonym for @option{-fprofile-arcs}
@option{-ftest-coverage} (when compiling) and @option{-lgcov} (when
linking).  See the documentation for those options for more details.

@itemize

@item
Compile the source files with @option{-fprofile-arcs} plus optimization
and code generation options.  For test coverage analysis, use the
additional @option{-ftest-coverage} option.  You do not need to profile
every source file in a program.

@item
Link your object files with @option{-lgcov} or @option{-fprofile-arcs}
(the latter implies the former).

@item
Run the program on a representative workload to generate the arc profile
information.  This may be repeated any number of times.  You can run
concurrent instances of your program, and provided that the file system
supports locking, the data files will be correctly updated.  Also
@code{fork} calls are detected and correctly handled (double counting
will not happen).

@item
For profile-directed optimizations, compile the source files again with
the same optimization and code generation options plus
@option{-fbranch-probabilities} (@pxref{Optimize Options,,Options that
Control Optimization}).

@item
For test coverage analysis, use @command{gcov} to produce human readable
information from the @file{.gcno} and @file{.gcda} files.  Refer to the
@command{gcov} documentation for further information.

@end itemize

With @option{-fprofile-arcs}, for each function of your program GCC
creates a program flow graph, then finds a spanning tree for the graph.
Only arcs that are not on the spanning tree have to be instrumented: the
compiler adds code to count the number of times that these arcs are
executed.  When an arc is the only exit or only entrance to a block, the
instrumentation code can be added to the block; otherwise, a new basic
block must be created to hold the instrumentation code.

@need 2000
@item -ftest-coverage
@opindex ftest-coverage
Produce a notes file that the @command{gcov} code-coverage utility
(@pxref{Gcov,, @command{gcov}---a Test Coverage Program}) can use to
show program coverage.  Each source file's note file is called
@file{@var{auxname}.gcno}.  Refer to the @option{-fprofile-arcs} option
above for a description of @var{auxname} and instructions on how to
generate test coverage data.  Coverage data matches the source files
more closely if you do not optimize.

@item -fprofile-dir=@var{path}
@opindex fprofile-dir

Set the directory to search for the profile data files in to @var{path}.
This option affects only the profile data generated by
@option{-fprofile-generate}, @option{-ftest-coverage}, @option{-fprofile-arcs}
and used by @option{-fprofile-use} and @option{-fbranch-probabilities}
and its related options.  Both absolute and relative paths can be used.
By default, GCC uses the current directory as @var{path}, thus the
profile data file appears in the same directory as the object file.

@item -fprofile-generate
@itemx -fprofile-generate=@var{path}
@opindex fprofile-generate

Enable options usually used for instrumenting application to produce
profile useful for later recompilation with profile feedback based
optimization.  You must use @option{-fprofile-generate} both when
compiling and when linking your program.

The following options are enabled: @option{-fprofile-arcs}, @option{-fprofile-values}, @option{-fvpt}.

If @var{path} is specified, GCC looks at the @var{path} to find
the profile feedback data files. See @option{-fprofile-dir}.

To optimize the program based on the collected profile information, use
@option{-fprofile-use}.  @xref{Optimize Options}, for more information.

@item -fsanitize=address
@opindex fsanitize=address
Enable AddressSanitizer, a fast memory error detector.
Memory access instructions are instrumented to detect
out-of-bounds and use-after-free bugs.
See @uref{https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/AddressSanitizer} for
more details.  The run-time behavior can be influenced using the
@env{ASAN_OPTIONS} environment variable.  When set to @code{help=1},
the available options are shown at startup of the instrumented program.  See
@url{https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/AddressSanitizerFlags#run-time-flags}
for a list of supported options.

@item -fsanitize=kernel-address
@opindex fsanitize=kernel-address
Enable AddressSanitizer for Linux kernel.
See @uref{https://github.com/google/kasan/wiki} for more details.

@item -fsanitize=thread
@opindex fsanitize=thread
Enable ThreadSanitizer, a fast data race detector.
Memory access instructions are instrumented to detect
data race bugs.  See @uref{https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki#threadsanitizer} for more
details. The run-time behavior can be influenced using the @env{TSAN_OPTIONS}
environment variable; see
@url{https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/ThreadSanitizerFlags} for a list of
supported options.

@item -fsanitize=leak
@opindex fsanitize=leak
Enable LeakSanitizer, a memory leak detector.
This option only matters for linking of executables and if neither
@option{-fsanitize=address} nor @option{-fsanitize=thread} is used.  In that
case the executable is linked against a library that overrides @code{malloc}
and other allocator functions.  See
@uref{https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/AddressSanitizerLeakSanitizer} for more
details.  The run-time behavior can be influenced using the
@env{LSAN_OPTIONS} environment variable.

@item -fsanitize=undefined
@opindex fsanitize=undefined
Enable UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer, a fast undefined behavior detector.
Various computations are instrumented to detect undefined behavior
at runtime.  Current suboptions are:

@table @gcctabopt

@item -fsanitize=shift
@opindex fsanitize=shift
This option enables checking that the result of a shift operation is
not undefined.  Note that what exactly is considered undefined differs
slightly between C and C++, as well as between ISO C90 and C99, etc.

@item -fsanitize=integer-divide-by-zero
@opindex fsanitize=integer-divide-by-zero
Detect integer division by zero as well as @code{INT_MIN / -1} division.

@item -fsanitize=unreachable
@opindex fsanitize=unreachable
With this option, the compiler turns the @code{__builtin_unreachable}
call into a diagnostics message call instead.  When reaching the
@code{__builtin_unreachable} call, the behavior is undefined.

@item -fsanitize=vla-bound
@opindex fsanitize=vla-bound
This option instructs the compiler to check that the size of a variable
length array is positive.

@item -fsanitize=null
@opindex fsanitize=null
This option enables pointer checking.  Particularly, the application
built with this option turned on will issue an error message when it
tries to dereference a NULL pointer, or if a reference (possibly an
rvalue reference) is bound to a NULL pointer, or if a method is invoked
on an object pointed by a NULL pointer.

@item -fsanitize=return
@opindex fsanitize=return
This option enables return statement checking.  Programs
built with this option turned on will issue an error message
when the end of a non-void function is reached without actually
returning a value.  This option works in C++ only.

@item -fsanitize=signed-integer-overflow
@opindex fsanitize=signed-integer-overflow
This option enables signed integer overflow checking.  We check that
the result of @code{+}, @code{*}, and both unary and binary @code{-}
does not overflow in the signed arithmetics.  Note, integer promotion
rules must be taken into account.  That is, the following is not an
overflow:
@smallexample
signed char a = SCHAR_MAX;
a++;
@end smallexample

@item -fsanitize=bounds
@opindex fsanitize=bounds
This option enables instrumentation of array bounds.  Various out of bounds
accesses are detected.  Flexible array members, flexible array member-like
arrays, and initializers of variables with static storage are not instrumented.

@item -fsanitize=bounds-strict
@opindex fsanitize=bounds-strict
This option enables strict instrumentation of array bounds.  Most out of bounds
accesses are detected, including flexible array members and flexible array
member-like arrays.  Initializers of variables with static storage are not
instrumented.

@item -fsanitize=alignment
@opindex fsanitize=alignment

This option enables checking of alignment of pointers when they are
dereferenced, or when a reference is bound to insufficiently aligned target,
or when a method or constructor is invoked on insufficiently aligned object.

@item -fsanitize=object-size
@opindex fsanitize=object-size
This option enables instrumentation of memory references using the
@code{__builtin_object_size} function.  Various out of bounds pointer
accesses are detected.

@item -fsanitize=float-divide-by-zero
@opindex fsanitize=float-divide-by-zero
Detect floating-point division by zero.  Unlike other similar options,
@option{-fsanitize=float-divide-by-zero} is not enabled by
@option{-fsanitize=undefined}, since floating-point division by zero can
be a legitimate way of obtaining infinities and NaNs.

@item -fsanitize=float-cast-overflow
@opindex fsanitize=float-cast-overflow
This option enables floating-point type to integer conversion checking.
We check that the result of the conversion does not overflow.
Unlike other similar options, @option{-fsanitize=float-cast-overflow} is
not enabled by @option{-fsanitize=undefined}.
This option does not work well with @code{FE_INVALID} exceptions enabled.

@item -fsanitize=nonnull-attribute
@opindex fsanitize=nonnull-attribute

This option enables instrumentation of calls, checking whether null values
are not passed to arguments marked as requiring a non-null value by the
@code{nonnull} function attribute.

@item -fsanitize=returns-nonnull-attribute
@opindex fsanitize=returns-nonnull-attribute

This option enables instrumentation of return statements in functions
marked with @code{returns_nonnull} function attribute, to detect returning
of null values from such functions.

@item -fsanitize=bool
@opindex fsanitize=bool

This option enables instrumentation of loads from bool.  If a value other
than 0/1 is loaded, a run-time error is issued.

@item -fsanitize=enum
@opindex fsanitize=enum

This option enables instrumentation of loads from an enum type.  If
a value outside the range of values for the enum type is loaded,
a run-time error is issued.

@item -fsanitize=vptr
@opindex fsanitize=vptr

This option enables instrumentation of C++ member function calls, member
accesses and some conversions between pointers to base and derived classes,
to verify the referenced object has the correct dynamic type.

@end table

While @option{-ftrapv} causes traps for signed overflows to be emitted,
@option{-fsanitize=undefined} gives a diagnostic message.
This currently works only for the C family of languages.

@item -fno-sanitize=all
@opindex fno-sanitize=all

This option disables all previously enabled sanitizers.
@option{-fsanitize=all} is not allowed, as some sanitizers cannot be used
together.

@item -fasan-shadow-offset=@var{number}
@opindex fasan-shadow-offset
This option forces GCC to use custom shadow offset in AddressSanitizer checks.
It is useful for experimenting with different shadow memory layouts in
Kernel AddressSanitizer.

@item -fsanitize-sections=@var{s1},@var{s2},...
@opindex fsanitize-sections
Sanitize global variables in selected user-defined sections.  @var{si} may
contain wildcards.

@item -fsanitize-recover@r{[}=@var{opts}@r{]}
@opindex fsanitize-recover
@opindex fno-sanitize-recover
@option{-fsanitize-recover=} controls error recovery mode for sanitizers
mentioned in comma-separated list of @var{opts}.  Enabling this option
for a sanitizer component causes it to attempt to continue
running the program as if no error happened.  This means multiple
runtime errors can be reported in a single program run, and the exit
code of the program may indicate success even when errors
have been reported.  The @option{-fno-sanitize-recover=} option
can be used to alter
this behavior: only the first detected error is reported
and program then exits with a non-zero exit code.

Currently this feature only works for @option{-fsanitize=undefined} (and its suboptions
except for @option{-fsanitize=unreachable} and @option{-fsanitize=return}),
@option{-fsanitize=float-cast-overflow}, @option{-fsanitize=float-divide-by-zero},
@option{-fsanitize=kernel-address} and @option{-fsanitize=address}.
For these sanitizers error recovery is turned on by default, except @option{-fsanitize=address},
for which this feature is experimental.
@option{-fsanitize-recover=all} and @option{-fno-sanitize-recover=all} is also
accepted, the former enables recovery for all sanitizers that support it,
the latter disables recovery for all sanitizers that support it.

Syntax without explicit @var{opts} parameter is deprecated.  It is equivalent to
@smallexample
-fsanitize-recover=undefined,float-cast-overflow,float-divide-by-zero
@end smallexample
@noindent
Similarly @option{-fno-sanitize-recover} is equivalent to
@smallexample
-fno-sanitize-recover=undefined,float-cast-overflow,float-divide-by-zero
@end smallexample

@item -fsanitize-undefined-trap-on-error
@opindex fsanitize-undefined-trap-on-error
The @option{-fsanitize-undefined-trap-on-error} option instructs the compiler to
report undefined behavior using @code{__builtin_trap} rather than
a @code{libubsan} library routine.  The advantage of this is that the
@code{libubsan} library is not needed and is not linked in, so this
is usable even in freestanding environments.

@item -fsanitize-coverage=trace-pc
@opindex fsanitize-coverage=trace-pc
Enable coverage-guided fuzzing code instrumentation.
Inserts a call to @code{__sanitizer_cov_trace_pc} into every basic block.

@item -fbounds-check
@opindex fbounds-check
For front ends that support it, generate additional code to check that
indices used to access arrays are within the declared range.  This is
currently only supported by the Java and Fortran front ends, where
this option defaults to true and false respectively.

@item -fcheck-pointer-bounds
@opindex fcheck-pointer-bounds
@opindex fno-check-pointer-bounds
@cindex Pointer Bounds Checker options
Enable Pointer Bounds Checker instrumentation.  Each memory reference
is instrumented with checks of the pointer used for memory access against
bounds associated with that pointer.  

Currently there
is only an implementation for Intel MPX available, thus x86 GNU/Linux target
and @option{-mmpx} are required to enable this feature.  
MPX-based instrumentation requires
a runtime library to enable MPX in hardware and handle bounds
violation signals.  By default when @option{-fcheck-pointer-bounds}
and @option{-mmpx} options are used to link a program, the GCC driver
links against the @file{libmpx} and @file{libmpxwrappers} libraries.
Bounds checking on calls to dynamic libraries requires a linker
with @option{-z bndplt} support; if GCC was configured with a linker
without support for this option (including the Gold linker and older
versions of ld), a warning is given if you link with @option{-mmpx}
without also specifying @option{-static}, since the overall effectiveness
of the bounds checking protection is reduced.
See also @option{-static-libmpxwrappers}.

MPX-based instrumentation
may be used for debugging and also may be included in production code
to increase program security.  Depending on usage, you may
have different requirements for the runtime library.  The current version
of the MPX runtime library is more oriented for use as a debugging
tool.  MPX runtime library usage implies @option{-lpthread}.  See
also @option{-static-libmpx}.  The runtime library  behavior can be
influenced using various @env{CHKP_RT_*} environment variables.  See
@uref{https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/Intel%20MPX%20support%20in%20the%20GCC%20compiler}
for more details.

Generated instrumentation may be controlled by various
@option{-fchkp-*} options and by the @code{bnd_variable_size}
structure field attribute (@pxref{Type Attributes}) and
@code{bnd_legacy}, and @code{bnd_instrument} function attributes
(@pxref{Function Attributes}).  GCC also provides a number of built-in
functions for controlling the Pointer Bounds Checker.  @xref{Pointer
Bounds Checker builtins}, for more information.

@item -fchkp-check-incomplete-type
@opindex fchkp-check-incomplete-type
@opindex fno-chkp-check-incomplete-type
Generate pointer bounds checks for variables with incomplete type.
Enabled by default.

@item -fchkp-narrow-bounds
@opindex fchkp-narrow-bounds
@opindex fno-chkp-narrow-bounds
Controls bounds used by Pointer Bounds Checker for pointers to object
fields.  If narrowing is enabled then field bounds are used.  Otherwise
object bounds are used.  See also @option{-fchkp-narrow-to-innermost-array}
and @option{-fchkp-first-field-has-own-bounds}.  Enabled by default.

@item -fchkp-first-field-has-own-bounds
@opindex fchkp-first-field-has-own-bounds
@opindex fno-chkp-first-field-has-own-bounds
Forces Pointer Bounds Checker to use narrowed bounds for the address of the
first field in the structure.  By default a pointer to the first field has
the same bounds as a pointer to the whole structure.

@item -fchkp-narrow-to-innermost-array
@opindex fchkp-narrow-to-innermost-array
@opindex fno-chkp-narrow-to-innermost-array
Forces Pointer Bounds Checker to use bounds of the innermost arrays in
case of nested static array access.  By default this option is disabled and
bounds of the outermost array are used.

@item -fchkp-optimize
@opindex fchkp-optimize
@opindex fno-chkp-optimize
Enables Pointer Bounds Checker optimizations.  Enabled by default at
optimization levels @option{-O}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}.

@item -fchkp-use-fast-string-functions
@opindex fchkp-use-fast-string-functions
@opindex fno-chkp-use-fast-string-functions
Enables use of @code{*_nobnd} versions of string functions (not copying bounds)
by Pointer Bounds Checker.  Disabled by default.

@item -fchkp-use-nochk-string-functions
@opindex fchkp-use-nochk-string-functions
@opindex fno-chkp-use-nochk-string-functions
Enables use of @code{*_nochk} versions of string functions (not checking bounds)
by Pointer Bounds Checker.  Disabled by default.

@item -fchkp-use-static-bounds
@opindex fchkp-use-static-bounds
@opindex fno-chkp-use-static-bounds
Allow Pointer Bounds Checker to generate static bounds holding
bounds of static variables.  Enabled by default.

@item -fchkp-use-static-const-bounds
@opindex fchkp-use-static-const-bounds
@opindex fno-chkp-use-static-const-bounds
Use statically-initialized bounds for constant bounds instead of
generating them each time they are required.  By default enabled when
@option{-fchkp-use-static-bounds} is enabled.

@item -fchkp-treat-zero-dynamic-size-as-infinite
@opindex fchkp-treat-zero-dynamic-size-as-infinite
@opindex fno-chkp-treat-zero-dynamic-size-as-infinite
With this option, objects with incomplete type whose
dynamically-obtained size is zero are treated as having infinite size
instead by Pointer Bounds
Checker.  This option may be helpful if a program is linked with a library
missing size information for some symbols.  Disabled by default.

@item -fchkp-check-read
@opindex fchkp-check-read
@opindex fno-chkp-check-read
Instructs Pointer Bounds Checker to generate checks for all read
accesses to memory.  Enabled by default.

@item -fchkp-check-write
@opindex fchkp-check-write
@opindex fno-chkp-check-write
Instructs Pointer Bounds Checker to generate checks for all write
accesses to memory.  Enabled by default.

@item -fchkp-store-bounds
@opindex fchkp-store-bounds
@opindex fno-chkp-store-bounds
Instructs Pointer Bounds Checker to generate bounds stores for
pointer writes.  Enabled by default.

@item -fchkp-instrument-calls
@opindex fchkp-instrument-calls
@opindex fno-chkp-instrument-calls
Instructs Pointer Bounds Checker to pass pointer bounds to calls.
Enabled by default.

@item -fchkp-instrument-marked-only
@opindex fchkp-instrument-marked-only
@opindex fno-chkp-instrument-marked-only
Instructs Pointer Bounds Checker to instrument only functions
marked with the @code{bnd_instrument} attribute
(@pxref{Function Attributes}).  Disabled by default.

@item -fchkp-use-wrappers
@opindex fchkp-use-wrappers
@opindex fno-chkp-use-wrappers
Allows Pointer Bounds Checker to replace calls to built-in functions
with calls to wrapper functions.  When @option{-fchkp-use-wrappers}
is used to link a program, the GCC driver automatically links
against @file{libmpxwrappers}.  See also @option{-static-libmpxwrappers}.
Enabled by default.

@item -fstack-protector
@opindex fstack-protector
Emit extra code to check for buffer overflows, such as stack smashing
attacks.  This is done by adding a guard variable to functions with
vulnerable objects.  This includes functions that call @code{alloca}, and
functions with buffers larger than 8 bytes.  The guards are initialized
when a function is entered and then checked when the function exits.
If a guard check fails, an error message is printed and the program exits.

@item -fstack-protector-all
@opindex fstack-protector-all
Like @option{-fstack-protector} except that all functions are protected.

@item -fstack-protector-strong
@opindex fstack-protector-strong
Like @option{-fstack-protector} but includes additional functions to
be protected --- those that have local array definitions, or have
references to local frame addresses.

@item -fstack-protector-explicit
@opindex fstack-protector-explicit
Like @option{-fstack-protector} but only protects those functions which
have the @code{stack_protect} attribute.

@item -fstack-check
@opindex fstack-check
Generate code to verify that you do not go beyond the boundary of the
stack.  You should specify this flag if you are running in an
environment with multiple threads, but you only rarely need to specify it in
a single-threaded environment since stack overflow is automatically
detected on nearly all systems if there is only one stack.

Note that this switch does not actually cause checking to be done; the
operating system or the language runtime must do that.  The switch causes
generation of code to ensure that they see the stack being extended.

You can additionally specify a string parameter: @samp{no} means no
checking, @samp{generic} means force the use of old-style checking,
@samp{specific} means use the best checking method and is equivalent
to bare @option{-fstack-check}.

Old-style checking is a generic mechanism that requires no specific
target support in the compiler but comes with the following drawbacks:

@enumerate
@item
Modified allocation strategy for large objects: they are always
allocated dynamically if their size exceeds a fixed threshold.

@item
Fixed limit on the size of the static frame of functions: when it is
topped by a particular function, stack checking is not reliable and
a warning is issued by the compiler.

@item
Inefficiency: because of both the modified allocation strategy and the
generic implementation, code performance is hampered.
@end enumerate

Note that old-style stack checking is also the fallback method for
@samp{specific} if no target support has been added in the compiler.

@item -fstack-limit-register=@var{reg}
@itemx -fstack-limit-symbol=@var{sym}
@itemx -fno-stack-limit
@opindex fstack-limit-register
@opindex fstack-limit-symbol
@opindex fno-stack-limit
Generate code to ensure that the stack does not grow beyond a certain value,
either the value of a register or the address of a symbol.  If a larger
stack is required, a signal is raised at run time.  For most targets,
the signal is raised before the stack overruns the boundary, so
it is possible to catch the signal without taking special precautions.

For instance, if the stack starts at absolute address @samp{0x80000000}
and grows downwards, you can use the flags
@option{-fstack-limit-symbol=__stack_limit} and
@option{-Wl,--defsym,__stack_limit=0x7ffe0000} to enforce a stack limit
of 128KB@.  Note that this may only work with the GNU linker.

You can locally override stack limit checking by using the
@code{no_stack_limit} function attribute (@pxref{Function Attributes}).

@item -fsplit-stack
@opindex fsplit-stack
Generate code to automatically split the stack before it overflows.
The resulting program has a discontiguous stack which can only
overflow if the program is unable to allocate any more memory.  This
is most useful when running threaded programs, as it is no longer
necessary to calculate a good stack size to use for each thread.  This
is currently only implemented for the x86 targets running
GNU/Linux.

When code compiled with @option{-fsplit-stack} calls code compiled
without @option{-fsplit-stack}, there may not be much stack space
available for the latter code to run.  If compiling all code,
including library code, with @option{-fsplit-stack} is not an option,
then the linker can fix up these calls so that the code compiled
without @option{-fsplit-stack} always has a large stack.  Support for
this is implemented in the gold linker in GNU binutils release 2.21
and later.

@item -fvtable-verify=@r{[}std@r{|}preinit@r{|}none@r{]}
@opindex fvtable-verify
This option is only available when compiling C++ code.
It turns on (or off, if using @option{-fvtable-verify=none}) the security
feature that verifies at run time, for every virtual call, that
the vtable pointer through which the call is made is valid for the type of
the object, and has not been corrupted or overwritten.  If an invalid vtable
pointer is detected at run time, an error is reported and execution of the
program is immediately halted.

This option causes run-time data structures to be built at program startup,
which are used for verifying the vtable pointers.  
The options @samp{std} and @samp{preinit}
control the timing of when these data structures are built.  In both cases the
data structures are built before execution reaches @code{main}.  Using
@option{-fvtable-verify=std} causes the data structures to be built after
shared libraries have been loaded and initialized.
@option{-fvtable-verify=preinit} causes them to be built before shared
libraries have been loaded and initialized.

If this option appears multiple times in the command line with different
values specified, @samp{none} takes highest priority over both @samp{std} and
@samp{preinit}; @samp{preinit} takes priority over @samp{std}.

@item -fvtv-debug
@opindex fvtv-debug
When used in conjunction with @option{-fvtable-verify=std} or 
@option{-fvtable-verify=preinit}, causes debug versions of the 
runtime functions for the vtable verification feature to be called.  
This flag also causes the compiler to log information about which 
vtable pointers it finds for each class.
This information is written to a file named @file{vtv_set_ptr_data.log} 
in the directory named by the environment variable @env{VTV_LOGS_DIR} 
if that is defined or the current working directory otherwise.

Note:  This feature @emph{appends} data to the log file. If you want a fresh log
file, be sure to delete any existing one.

@item -fvtv-counts
@opindex fvtv-counts
This is a debugging flag.  When used in conjunction with
@option{-fvtable-verify=std} or @option{-fvtable-verify=preinit}, this
causes the compiler to keep track of the total number of virtual calls
it encounters and the number of verifications it inserts.  It also
counts the number of calls to certain run-time library functions
that it inserts and logs this information for each compilation unit.
The compiler writes this information to a file named
@file{vtv_count_data.log} in the directory named by the environment
variable @env{VTV_LOGS_DIR} if that is defined or the current working
directory otherwise.  It also counts the size of the vtable pointer sets
for each class, and writes this information to @file{vtv_class_set_sizes.log}
in the same directory.

Note:  This feature @emph{appends} data to the log files.  To get fresh log
files, be sure to delete any existing ones.

@item -finstrument-functions
@opindex finstrument-functions
Generate instrumentation calls for entry and exit to functions.  Just
after function entry and just before function exit, the following
profiling functions are called with the address of the current
function and its call site.  (On some platforms,
@code{__builtin_return_address} does not work beyond the current
function, so the call site information may not be available to the
profiling functions otherwise.)

@smallexample
void __cyg_profile_func_enter (void *this_fn,
                               void *call_site);
void __cyg_profile_func_exit  (void *this_fn,
                               void *call_site);
@end smallexample

The first argument is the address of the start of the current function,
which may be looked up exactly in the symbol table.

This instrumentation is also done for functions expanded inline in other
functions.  The profiling calls indicate where, conceptually, the
inline function is entered and exited.  This means that addressable
versions of such functions must be available.  If all your uses of a
function are expanded inline, this may mean an additional expansion of
code size.  If you use @code{extern inline} in your C code, an
addressable version of such functions must be provided.  (This is
normally the case anyway, but if you get lucky and the optimizer always
expands the functions inline, you might have gotten away without
providing static copies.)

A function may be given the attribute @code{no_instrument_function}, in
which case this instrumentation is not done.  This can be used, for
example, for the profiling functions listed above, high-priority
interrupt routines, and any functions from which the profiling functions
cannot safely be called (perhaps signal handlers, if the profiling
routines generate output or allocate memory).

@item -finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list=@var{file},@var{file},@dots{}
@opindex finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list

Set the list of functions that are excluded from instrumentation (see
the description of @option{-finstrument-functions}).  If the file that
contains a function definition matches with one of @var{file}, then
that function is not instrumented.  The match is done on substrings:
if the @var{file} parameter is a substring of the file name, it is
considered to be a match.

For example:

@smallexample
-finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list=/bits/stl,include/sys
@end smallexample

@noindent
excludes any inline function defined in files whose pathnames
contain @file{/bits/stl} or @file{include/sys}.

If, for some reason, you want to include letter @samp{,} in one of
@var{sym}, write @samp{\,}. For example,
@option{-finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list='\,\,tmp'}
(note the single quote surrounding the option).

@item -finstrument-functions-exclude-function-list=@var{sym},@var{sym},@dots{}
@opindex finstrument-functions-exclude-function-list

This is similar to @option{-finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list},
but this option sets the list of function names to be excluded from
instrumentation.  The function name to be matched is its user-visible
name, such as @code{vector<int> blah(const vector<int> &)}, not the
internal mangled name (e.g., @code{_Z4blahRSt6vectorIiSaIiEE}).  The
match is done on substrings: if the @var{sym} parameter is a substring
of the function name, it is considered to be a match.  For C99 and C++
extended identifiers, the function name must be given in UTF-8, not
using universal character names.

@end table


@node Preprocessor Options
@section Options Controlling the Preprocessor
@cindex preprocessor options
@cindex options, preprocessor

These options control the C preprocessor, which is run on each C source
file before actual compilation.

If you use the @option{-E} option, nothing is done except preprocessing.
Some of these options make sense only together with @option{-E} because
they cause the preprocessor output to be unsuitable for actual
compilation.

The following options have LLVM behavior which differs from GCC:
@gccoptlist{-C}

The following GCC options are accepted by LLVM, but have no effect and
by default will generate a warning:
@gccoptlist{-A@var{question}=@var{answer} @gol
-A-@var{question}@r{[}=@var{answer}@r{]}}

The following GCC options are not accepted by LLVM:
@gccoptlist{-A@var{question}=@var{answer} @gol
-A-@var{question}@r{[}=@var{answer}@r{]} @gol
-C  -dD  -dI  -dM  -dN -dU @gol
-D@var{macro}@r{[}=@var{defn}@r{]}  -E  -H @gol
-idirafter @var{dir} @gol
-include @var{file}  -imacros @var{file} @gol
-iprefix @var{file}  -iwithprefix @var{dir} @gol
-iwithprefixbefore @var{dir}  -isystem @var{dir} @gol
-imultilib @var{dir} -isysroot @var{dir} @gol
-M  -MM  -MF  -MG  -MP  -MQ  -MT  -nostdinc  @gol
-P  -fdebug-cpp -ftrack-macro-expansion -fworking-directory @gol
-remap -trigraphs  -undef  -U@var{macro}  @gol
-Wp,@var{option} -Xpreprocessor @var{option} -no-integrated-cpp}

@table @gcctabopt
@item -Wp,@var{option}
@opindex Wp
You can use @option{-Wp,@var{option}} to bypass the compiler driver
and pass @var{option} directly through to the preprocessor.  If
@var{option} contains commas, it is split into multiple options at the
commas.  However, many options are modified, translated or interpreted
by the compiler driver before being passed to the preprocessor, and
@option{-Wp} forcibly bypasses this phase.  The preprocessor's direct
interface is undocumented and subject to change, so whenever possible
you should avoid using @option{-Wp} and let the driver handle the
options instead.

@item -Xpreprocessor @var{option}
@opindex Xpreprocessor
Pass @var{option} as an option to the preprocessor.  You can use this to
supply system-specific preprocessor options that LLVM does not
recognize.

If you want to pass an option that takes an argument, you must use
@option{-Xpreprocessor} twice, once for the option and once for the argument.

@item -no-integrated-cpp
@opindex no-integrated-cpp
Perform preprocessing as a separate pass before compilation.  By
default, LLVM performs preprocessing as an integrated part of input
tokenization and parsing.  If this option is provided, @command{clang}
is instead invoked twice, once for preprocessing only and once for
actual compilation of the preprocessed input.  This option may be
useful in conjunction with the @option{-B} or @option{-wrapper}
options to specify an alternate preprocessor or perform additional
processing of the program source between normal preprocessing and
compilation.

@item -D @var{name}
@opindex D
Predefine @var{name} as a macro, with definition @code{1}.

@item -D @var{name}=@var{definition}
The contents of @var{definition} are tokenized and processed as if
they appeared during translation phase three in a @samp{#define}
directive.  In particular, the definition will be truncated by
embedded newline characters.

If you are invoking the preprocessor from a shell or shell-like
program you may need to use the shell's quoting syntax to protect
characters such as spaces that have a meaning in the shell syntax.

If you wish to define a function-like macro on the command line, write
its argument list with surrounding parentheses before the equals sign
(if any).  Parentheses are meaningful to most shells, so you will need
to quote the option.  With @command{sh} and @command{csh},
@option{-D'@var{name}(@var{args@dots{}})=@var{definition}'} works.

@option{-D} and @option{-U} options are processed in the order they
are given on the command line.  All @option{-imacros @var{file}} and
@option{-include @var{file}} options are processed after all
@option{-D} and @option{-U} options.

@item -U @var{name}
@opindex U
Cancel any previous definition of @var{name}, either built in or
provided with a @option{-D} option.

@item -undef
@opindex undef
Do not predefine any system-specific or LLVM-specific macros.  The
standard predefined macros remain defined.

@item -I @var{dir}
@opindex I
Add the directory @var{dir} to the list of directories to be searched
for header files.  Directories named by @option{-I} are searched
before the standard system include directories.  If the directory
@var{dir} is a standard system include directory, the option is
ignored to ensure that the default search order for system directories
and the special treatment of system headers are not defeated.  If
@var{dir} begins with @code{=}, then the @code{=} will be replaced by
the sysroot prefix; see @option{--sysroot} and @option{-isysroot}.

@item -Wundef
@anchor{op Wundef}
@opindex Wundef
@opindex Wno-undef
Warn whenever an identifier which is not a macro is encountered in an
@samp{#if} directive, outside of @samp{defined}.  Such identifiers are
replaced with zero.

@item -Wunused-macros
@opindex Wunused-macros
Warn about macros defined in the main file that are unused.  A macro
is @dfn{used} if it is expanded or tested for existence at least once.
The preprocessor will also warn if the macro has not been used at the
time it is redefined or undefined.

Built-in macros, macros defined on the command line, and macros
defined in include files are not warned about.

@emph{Note:} If a macro is actually used, but only used in skipped
conditional blocks, then CPP will report it as unused.  To avoid the
warning in such a case, you might improve the scope of the macro's
definition by, for example, moving it into the first skipped block.
Alternatively, you could provide a dummy use with something like:

@smallexample
#if defined the_macro_causing_the_warning
#endif
@end smallexample

@item -Wendif-labels
@anchor{op Wno-endif-labels}
@opindex Wno-endif-labels
@opindex Wendif-labels
Warn whenever an @samp{#else} or an @samp{#endif} is followed by text.
This usually happens in code of the form:

@smallexample
#if FOO
@dots{}
#else FOO
@dots{}
#endif FOO
@end smallexample

@noindent
The second and third @code{FOO} should be in comments, but often are not
in older programs.  This warning is on by default.

@item -Wsystem-headers
@opindex Wsystem-headers
Issue warnings for code in system headers.  These are normally unhelpful
in finding bugs in your own code, therefore suppressed.  If you are
responsible for the system library, you may want to see them.

@item -w
@opindex w
Suppress all warnings, including those which GNU CPP issues by default.

@item -pedantic
@opindex pedantic
Issue all the mandatory diagnostics listed in the C standard.  Some of
them are left out by default, since they trigger frequently on harmless
code.

@item -pedantic-errors
@opindex pedantic-errors
Issue all the mandatory diagnostics, and make all mandatory diagnostics
into errors.  This includes mandatory diagnostics that LLVM issues
without @samp{-pedantic} but treats as warnings.

@item -M
@opindex M
@cindex @command{make}
@cindex dependencies, @command{make}
Instead of outputting the result of preprocessing, output a rule
suitable for @command{make} describing the dependencies of the main
source file.  The preprocessor outputs one @command{make} rule containing
the object file name for that source file, a colon, and the names of all
the included files, including those coming from @option{-include} or
@option{-imacros} command line options.

Unless specified explicitly (with @option{-MT} or @option{-MQ}), the
object file name consists of the name of the source file with any
suffix replaced with object file suffix and with any leading directory
parts removed.  If there are many included files then the rule is
split into several lines using @samp{\}-newline.  The rule has no
commands.

This option does not suppress the preprocessor's debug output, such as
@option{-dM}.  To avoid mixing such debug output with the dependency
rules you should explicitly specify the dependency output file with
@option{-MF}, or use an environment variable like
@env{DEPENDENCIES_OUTPUT} (@pxref{Environment Variables}).  Debug output
will still be sent to the regular output stream as normal.

Passing @option{-M} to the driver implies @option{-E}, and suppresses
warnings with an implicit @option{-w}.

@item -MM
@opindex MM
Like @option{-M} but do not mention header files that are found in
system header directories, nor header files that are included,
directly or indirectly, from such a header.

This implies that the choice of angle brackets or double quotes in an
@samp{#include} directive does not in itself determine whether that
header will appear in @option{-MM} dependency output.  This is a
slight change in semantics from GCC versions 3.0 and earlier.

@anchor{dashMF}
@item -MF @var{file}
@opindex MF
When used with @option{-M} or @option{-MM}, specifies a
file to write the dependencies to.  If no @option{-MF} switch is given
the preprocessor sends the rules to the same place it would have sent
preprocessed output.

When used with the driver options @option{-MD} or @option{-MMD},
@option{-MF} overrides the default dependency output file.

@item -MG
@opindex MG
In conjunction with an option such as @option{-M} requesting
dependency generation, @option{-MG} assumes missing header files are
generated files and adds them to the dependency list without raising
an error.  The dependency filename is taken directly from the
@code{#include} directive without prepending any path.  @option{-MG}
also suppresses preprocessed output, as a missing header file renders
this useless.

This feature is used in automatic updating of makefiles.

@item -MP
@opindex MP
This option instructs CPP to add a phony target for each dependency
other than the main file, causing each to depend on nothing.  These
dummy rules work around errors @command{make} gives if you remove header
files without updating the @file{Makefile} to match.

This is typical output:

@smallexample
test.o: test.c test.h

test.h:
@end smallexample

@item -MT @var{target}
@opindex MT

Change the target of the rule emitted by dependency generation.  By
default CPP takes the name of the main input file, deletes any
directory components and any file suffix such as @samp{.c}, and
appends the platform's usual object suffix.  The result is the target.

An @option{-MT} option will set the target to be exactly the string you
specify.  If you want multiple targets, you can specify them as a single
argument to @option{-MT}, or use multiple @option{-MT} options.

For example, @option{@w{-MT '$(objpfx)foo.o'}} might give

@smallexample
$(objpfx)foo.o: foo.c
@end smallexample

@item -MQ @var{target}
@opindex MQ

Same as @option{-MT}, but it quotes any characters which are special to
Make.  @option{@w{-MQ '$(objpfx)foo.o'}} gives

@smallexample
$$(objpfx)foo.o: foo.c
@end smallexample

The default target is automatically quoted, as if it were given with
@option{-MQ}.

@item -MD
@opindex MD
@option{-MD} is equivalent to @option{-M -MF @var{file}}, except that
@option{-E} is not implied.  The driver determines @var{file} based on
whether an @option{-o} option is given.  If it is, the driver uses its
argument but with a suffix of @file{.d}, otherwise it takes the name
of the input file, removes any directory components and suffix, and
applies a @file{.d} suffix.

If @option{-MD} is used in conjunction with @option{-E}, any
@option{-o} switch is understood to specify the dependency output file
(@pxref{dashMF,,-MF}), but if used without @option{-E}, each @option{-o}
is understood to specify a target object file.

Since @option{-E} is not implied, @option{-MD} can be used to generate
a dependency output file as a side-effect of the compilation process.

@item -MMD
@opindex MMD
Like @option{-MD} except mention only user header files, not system
header files.

@item -fpch-deps
@opindex fpch-deps
When using precompiled headers (@pxref{Precompiled Headers}), this flag
will cause the dependency-output flags to also list the files from the
precompiled header's dependencies.  If not specified only the
precompiled header would be listed and not the files that were used to
create it because those files are not consulted when a precompiled
header is used.

@item -fpch-preprocess
@opindex fpch-preprocess
This option allows use of a precompiled header (@pxref{Precompiled
Headers}) together with @option{-E}.  It inserts a special @code{#pragma},
@code{#pragma GCC pch_preprocess "@var{filename}"} in the output to mark
the place where the precompiled header was found, and its @var{filename}.
When @option{-fpreprocessed} is in use, LLVM recognizes this @code{#pragma}
and loads the PCH@.

This option is off by default, because the resulting preprocessed output
is only really suitable as input to LLVM@.  It is switched on by
@option{-save-temps}.

You should not write this @code{#pragma} in your own code, but it is
safe to edit the filename if the PCH file is available in a different
location.  The filename may be absolute or it may be relative to LLVM's
current directory.

@item -x c
@itemx -x c++
@itemx -x objective-c
@itemx -x assembler-with-cpp
@opindex x
Specify the source language: C, C++, Objective-C, or assembly.  This has
nothing to do with standards conformance or extensions; it merely
selects which base syntax to expect.  If you give none of these options,
cpp will deduce the language from the extension of the source file:
@samp{.c}, @samp{.cc}, @samp{.m}, or @samp{.S}.  Some other common
extensions for C++ and assembly are also recognized.  If cpp does not
recognize the extension, it will treat the file as C; this is the most
generic mode.

@emph{Note:} Previous versions of cpp accepted a @option{-lang} option
which selected both the language and the standards conformance level.
This option has been removed, because it conflicts with the @option{-l}
option.

@item -nostdinc
@opindex nostdinc
Do not search the standard system directories for header files.
Only the directories you have specified with @option{-I} options
(and the directory of the current file, if appropriate) are searched.

@item -nostdinc++
@anchor{op nostdinc++}
@opindex nostdinc++
Do not search for header files in the standard directories specific to
C++, but do still search the other standard directories.  (This option
is used when building the C++ library.)

@item -include @var{file}
@opindex include
Process @var{file} as if @code{#include "file"} appeared as the first
line of the primary source file.  However, the first directory searched
for @var{file} is the preprocessor's working directory @emph{instead of}
the directory containing the main source file.  If not found there, it
is searched for in the remainder of the @code{#include "@dots{}"} search
chain as normal.

If multiple @option{-include} options are given, the files are included
in the order they appear on the command line.

@item -imacros @var{file}
@opindex imacros
Exactly like @option{-include}, except that any output produced by
scanning @var{file} is thrown away.  Macros it defines remain defined.
This allows you to acquire all the macros from a header without also
processing its declarations.

All files specified by @option{-imacros} are processed before all files
specified by @option{-include}.

@item -idirafter @var{dir}
@opindex idirafter
Search @var{dir} for header files, but do it @emph{after} all
directories specified with @option{-I} and the standard system directories
have been exhausted.  @var{dir} is treated as a system include directory.
If @var{dir} begins with @code{=}, then the @code{=} will be replaced
by the sysroot prefix; see @option{--sysroot} and @option{-isysroot}.

@item -iprefix @var{prefix}
@opindex iprefix
Specify @var{prefix} as the prefix for subsequent @option{-iwithprefix}
options.  If the prefix represents a directory, you should include the
final @samp{/}.

@item -iwithprefix @var{dir}
@itemx -iwithprefixbefore @var{dir}
@opindex iwithprefix
@opindex iwithprefixbefore
Append @var{dir} to the prefix specified previously with
@option{-iprefix}, and add the resulting directory to the include search
path.  @option{-iwithprefixbefore} puts it in the same place @option{-I}
would; @option{-iwithprefix} puts it where @option{-idirafter} would.

@item -isysroot @var{dir}
@opindex isysroot
This option is like the @option{--sysroot} option, but applies only to
header files (except for Darwin targets, where it applies to both header
files and libraries).  See the @option{--sysroot} option for more
information.

@item -imultilib @var{dir}
@opindex imultilib
Use @var{dir} as a subdirectory of the directory containing
target-specific C++ headers.

@item -isystem @var{dir}
@opindex isystem
Search @var{dir} for header files, after all directories specified by
@option{-I} but before the standard system directories.  Mark it as a
system directory, so that it gets the same special treatment as is
applied to the standard system directories.  If @var{dir} begins with
@code{=}, then the @code{=} will be replaced by the sysroot prefix;
see @option{--sysroot} and @option{-isysroot}.

@item -fdirectives-only
@opindex fdirectives-only
When preprocessing, handle directives, but do not expand macros.

The option's behavior depends on the @option{-E} and @option{-fpreprocessed}
options.

With @option{-E}, preprocessing is limited to the handling of directives
such as @code{#define}, @code{#ifdef}, and @code{#error}.  Other
preprocessor operations, such as macro expansion and trigraph
conversion are not performed.  In addition, the @option{-dD} option is
implicitly enabled.

With @option{-fpreprocessed}, predefinition of command line and most
builtin macros is disabled.  Macros such as @code{__LINE__}, which are
contextually dependent, are handled normally.  This enables compilation of
files previously preprocessed with @code{-E -fdirectives-only}.

With both @option{-E} and @option{-fpreprocessed}, the rules for
@option{-fpreprocessed} take precedence.  This enables full preprocessing of
files previously preprocessed with @code{-E -fdirectives-only}.

@item -fdollars-in-identifiers
@opindex fdollars-in-identifiers
@anchor{fdollars-in-identifiers}
Accept @samp{$} in identifiers.

@item -fextended-identifiers
@opindex fextended-identifiers
Accept universal character names in identifiers.  This option is
enabled by default for C99 (and later C standard versions) and C++.

@item -fno-canonical-system-headers
@opindex fno-canonical-system-headers
When preprocessing, do not shorten system header paths with canonicalization.

@item -fpreprocessed
@opindex fpreprocessed
Indicate to the preprocessor that the input file has already been
preprocessed.  This suppresses things like macro expansion, trigraph
conversion, escaped newline splicing, and processing of most directives.
The preprocessor still recognizes and removes comments, so that you can
pass a file preprocessed with @option{-C} to the compiler without
problems.  In this mode the integrated preprocessor is little more than
a tokenizer for the front ends.

@option{-fpreprocessed} is implicit if the input file has one of the
extensions @samp{.i}, @samp{.ii} or @samp{.mi}.  These are the
extensions that LLVM uses for preprocessed files created by
@option{-save-temps}.

@item -ftabstop=@var{width}
@opindex ftabstop
Set the distance between tab stops.  This helps the preprocessor report
correct column numbers in warnings or errors, even if tabs appear on the
line.  If the value is less than 1 or greater than 100, the option is
ignored.  The default is 8.

@item -fdebug-cpp
@opindex fdebug-cpp
This option is only useful for debugging LLVM.  When used with
@option{-E}, dumps debugging information about location maps.  Every
token in the output is preceded by the dump of the map its location
belongs to.  The dump of the map holding the location of a token would
be:
@smallexample
@{@samp{P}:@file{/file/path};@samp{F}:@file{/includer/path};@samp{L}:@var{line_num};@samp{C}:@var{col_num};@samp{S}:@var{system_header_p};@samp{M}:@var{map_address};@samp{E}:@var{macro_expansion_p},@samp{loc}:@var{location}@}
@end smallexample

When used without @option{-E}, this option has no effect.

@item -ftrack-macro-expansion@r{[}=@var{level}@r{]}
@opindex ftrack-macro-expansion
Track locations of tokens across macro expansions. This allows the
compiler to emit diagnostic about the current macro expansion stack
when a compilation error occurs in a macro expansion. Using this
option makes the preprocessor and the compiler consume more
memory. The @var{level} parameter can be used to choose the level of
precision of token location tracking thus decreasing the memory
consumption if necessary. Value @samp{0} of @var{level} de-activates
this option just as if no @option{-ftrack-macro-expansion} was present
on the command line. Value @samp{1} tracks tokens locations in a
degraded mode for the sake of minimal memory overhead. In this mode
all tokens resulting from the expansion of an argument of a
function-like macro have the same location. Value @samp{2} tracks
tokens locations completely. This value is the most memory hungry.
When this option is given no argument, the default parameter value is
@samp{2}.

Note that @code{-ftrack-macro-expansion=2} is activated by default.

@item -fexec-charset=@var{charset}
@opindex fexec-charset
@cindex character set, execution
Set the execution character set, used for string and character
constants.  The default is UTF-8.  @var{charset} can be any encoding
supported by the system's @code{iconv} library routine.

@item -fwide-exec-charset=@var{charset}
@opindex fwide-exec-charset
@cindex character set, wide execution
Set the wide execution character set, used for wide string and
character constants.  The default is UTF-32 or UTF-16, whichever
corresponds to the width of @code{wchar_t}.  As with
@option{-fexec-charset}, @var{charset} can be any encoding supported
by the system's @code{iconv} library routine; however, you will have
problems with encodings that do not fit exactly in @code{wchar_t}.

@item -finput-charset=@var{charset}
@opindex finput-charset
@cindex character set, input
Set the input character set, used for translation from the character
set of the input file to the source character set used by LLVM@.  If the
locale does not specify, or LLVM cannot get this information from the
locale, the default is UTF-8.  This can be overridden by either the locale
or this command line option.  Currently the command line option takes
precedence if there's a conflict.  @var{charset} can be any encoding
supported by the system's @code{iconv} library routine.

@item -fworking-directory
@opindex fworking-directory
@opindex fno-working-directory
Enable generation of linemarkers in the preprocessor output that will
let the compiler know the current working directory at the time of
preprocessing.  When this option is enabled, the preprocessor will
emit, after the initial linemarker, a second linemarker with the
current working directory followed by two slashes.  LLVM will use this
directory, when it's present in the preprocessed input, as the
directory emitted as the current working directory in some debugging
information formats.  This option is implicitly enabled if debugging
information is enabled, but this can be inhibited with the negated
form @option{-fno-working-directory}.  If the @option{-P} flag is
present in the command line, this option has no effect, since no
@code{#line} directives are emitted whatsoever.

@item -fno-show-column
@opindex fno-show-column
Do not print column numbers in diagnostics.  This may be necessary if
diagnostics are being scanned by a program that does not understand the
column numbers, such as @command{dejagnu}.

@item -A @var{predicate}=@var{answer}
@opindex A
Make an assertion with the predicate @var{predicate} and answer
@var{answer}.  This form is preferred to the older form @option{-A
@var{predicate}(@var{answer})}, which is still supported, because
it does not use shell special characters.

@item -A -@var{predicate}=@var{answer}
Cancel an assertion with the predicate @var{predicate} and answer
@var{answer}.

@item -dCHARS
@var{CHARS} is a sequence of one or more of the following characters,
and must not be preceded by a space.  Other characters are interpreted
by the compiler proper, or reserved for future versions of LLVM, and so
are silently ignored.  If you specify characters whose behavior
conflicts, the result is undefined.

@table @samp
@item M
@opindex dM
Instead of the normal output, generate a list of @samp{#define}
directives for all the macros defined during the execution of the
preprocessor, including predefined macros.  This gives you a way of
finding out what is predefined in your version of the preprocessor.
Assuming you have no file @file{foo.h}, the command

@smallexample
touch foo.h; cpp -dM foo.h
@end smallexample

@noindent
will show all the predefined macros.

If you use @option{-dM} without the @option{-E} option, @option{-dM} is
interpreted as a synonym for @option{-fdump-rtl-mach}.
@xref{Debugging Options, , ,gcc}.

@item D
@opindex dD
Like @samp{M} except in two respects: it does @emph{not} include the
predefined macros, and it outputs @emph{both} the @samp{#define}
directives and the result of preprocessing.  Both kinds of output go to
the standard output file.

@item N
@opindex dN
Like @samp{D}, but emit only the macro names, not their expansions.

@item I
@opindex dI
Output @samp{#include} directives in addition to the result of
preprocessing.

@item U
@opindex dU
Like @samp{D} except that only macros that are expanded, or whose
definedness is tested in preprocessor directives, are output; the
output is delayed until the use or test of the macro; and
@samp{#undef} directives are also output for macros tested but
undefined at the time.
@end table

@item -P
@opindex P
Inhibit generation of linemarkers in the output from the preprocessor.
This might be useful when running the preprocessor on something that is
not C code, and will be sent to a program which might be confused by the
linemarkers.

@item -C
@opindex C
Do not discard comments.  All comments are passed through to the output
file, except for comments in processed directives, which are deleted
along with the directive.

You should be prepared for side effects when using @option{-C}; it
causes the preprocessor to treat comments as tokens in their own right.
For example, comments appearing at the start of what would be a
directive line have the effect of turning that line into an ordinary
source line, since the first token on the line is no longer a @samp{#}.

@item -CC
Do not discard comments, including during macro expansion.  This is
like @option{-C}, except that comments contained within macros are
also passed through to the output file where the macro is expanded.

In addition to the side-effects of the @option{-C} option, the
@option{-CC} option causes all C++-style comments inside a macro
to be converted to C-style comments.  This is to prevent later use
of that macro from inadvertently commenting out the remainder of
the source line.

The @option{-CC} option is generally used to support lint comments.

@item -remap
@opindex remap
Enable special code to work around file systems which only permit very
short file names, such as MS-DOS@.

@item -H
@opindex H
Print the name of each header file used, in addition to other normal
activities.  Each name is indented to show how deep in the
@samp{#include} stack it is.  Precompiled header files are also
printed, even if they are found to be invalid; an invalid precompiled
header file is printed with @samp{...x} and a valid one with @samp{...!} .

@end table

@node Assembler Options
@section Passing Options to the Assembler

@c prevent bad page break with this line
You can pass options to the assembler.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -Wa,@var{option}
@opindex Wa
Pass @var{option} as an option to the assembler.  If @var{option}
contains commas, it is split into multiple options at the commas.

@item -Xassembler @var{option}
@opindex Xassembler
Pass @var{option} as an option to the assembler.  You can use this to
supply system-specific assembler options that LLVM does not
recognize.

If you want to pass an option that takes an argument, you must use
@option{-Xassembler} twice, once for the option and once for the argument.

@end table

@node Link Options
@section Options for Linking
@cindex link options
@cindex options, linking

These options come into play when the compiler links object files into
an executable output file.  They are meaningless if the compiler is
not doing a link step.

@table @gcctabopt
@cindex file names
@item @var{object-file-name}
A file name that does not end in a special recognized suffix is
considered to name an object file or library.  (Object files are
distinguished from libraries by the linker according to the file
contents.)  If linking is done, these object files are used as input
to the linker.

@item -c
@itemx -S
@itemx -E
@opindex c
@opindex S
@opindex E
If any of these options is used, then the linker is not run, and
object file names should not be used as arguments.  @xref{Overall
Options}.

@item -fuse-ld=bfd
@opindex fuse-ld=bfd
Use the @command{bfd} linker instead of the default linker.

@item -fuse-ld=gold
@opindex fuse-ld=gold
Use the @command{gold} linker instead of the default linker.

@cindex Libraries
@item -l@var{library}
@itemx -l @var{library}
@opindex l
Search the library named @var{library} when linking.  (The second
alternative with the library as a separate argument is only for
POSIX compliance and is not recommended.)

It makes a difference where in the command you write this option; the
linker searches and processes libraries and object files in the order they
are specified.  Thus, @samp{foo.o -lz bar.o} searches library @samp{z}
after file @file{foo.o} but before @file{bar.o}.  If @file{bar.o} refers
to functions in @samp{z}, those functions may not be loaded.

The linker searches a standard list of directories for the library,
which is actually a file named @file{lib@var{library}.a}.  The linker
then uses this file as if it had been specified precisely by name.

The directories searched include several standard system directories
plus any that you specify with @option{-L}.

Normally the files found this way are library files---archive files
whose members are object files.  The linker handles an archive file by
scanning through it for members which define symbols that have so far
been referenced but not defined.  But if the file that is found is an
ordinary object file, it is linked in the usual fashion.  The only
difference between using an @option{-l} option and specifying a file name
is that @option{-l} surrounds @var{library} with @samp{lib} and @samp{.a}
and searches several directories.

@item -lobjc
@opindex lobjc
You need this special case of the @option{-l} option in order to
link an Objective-C or Objective-C++ program.

@item -nostartfiles
@opindex nostartfiles
Do not use the standard system startup files when linking.
The standard system libraries are used normally, unless @option{-nostdlib}
or @option{-nodefaultlibs} is used.

@item -nodefaultlibs
@opindex nodefaultlibs
Do not use the standard system libraries when linking.
Only the libraries you specify are passed to the linker, and options
specifying linkage of the system libraries, such as @option{-static-libgcc}
or @option{-shared-libgcc}, are ignored.
The standard startup files are used normally, unless @option{-nostartfiles}
is used.

The compiler may generate calls to @code{memcmp},
@code{memset}, @code{memcpy} and @code{memmove}.
These entries are usually resolved by entries in
libc.  These entry points should be supplied through some other
mechanism when this option is specified.

@item -nostdlib
@opindex nostdlib
Do not use the standard system startup files or libraries when linking.
No startup files and only the libraries you specify are passed to
the linker, and options specifying linkage of the system libraries, such as
@option{-static-libgcc} or @option{-shared-libgcc}, are ignored.

The compiler may generate calls to @code{memcmp}, @code{memset},
@code{memcpy} and @code{memmove}.
These entries are usually resolved by entries in
libc.  These entry points should be supplied through some other
mechanism when this option is specified.

@cindex @option{-lgcc}, use with @option{-nostdlib}
@cindex @option{-nostdlib} and unresolved references
@cindex unresolved references and @option{-nostdlib}
@cindex @option{-lgcc}, use with @option{-nodefaultlibs}
@cindex @option{-nodefaultlibs} and unresolved references
@cindex unresolved references and @option{-nodefaultlibs}
One of the standard libraries bypassed by @option{-nostdlib} and
@option{-nodefaultlibs} is @file{libgcc.a}, a library of internal subroutines
which LLVM uses to overcome shortcomings of particular machines, or special
needs for some languages.
(@xref{Interface,,Interfacing to GCC Output,gccint,GNU Compiler
Collection (GCC) Internals},
for more discussion of @file{libgcc.a}.)
In most cases, you need @file{libgcc.a} even when you want to avoid
other standard libraries.  In other words, when you specify @option{-nostdlib}
or @option{-nodefaultlibs} you should usually specify @option{-lgcc} as well.
This ensures that you have no unresolved references to internal LLVM
library subroutines.
(An example of such an internal subroutine is @code{__main}, used to ensure C++
constructors are called; @pxref{Collect2,,@code{collect2}, gccint,
GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) Internals}.)

@item -pie
@opindex pie
Produce a position independent executable on targets that support it.
For predictable results, you must also specify the same set of options
used for compilation (@option{-fpie}, @option{-fPIE},
or model suboptions) when you specify this linker option.

@item -rdynamic
@opindex rdynamic
Pass the flag @option{-export-dynamic} to the ELF linker, on targets
that support it. This instructs the linker to add all symbols, not
only used ones, to the dynamic symbol table. This option is needed
for some uses of @code{dlopen} or to allow obtaining backtraces
from within a program.

@item -s
@opindex s
Remove all symbol table and relocation information from the executable.

@item -static
@opindex static
On systems that support dynamic linking, this prevents linking with the shared
libraries.  On other systems, this option has no effect.

@item -shared
@opindex shared
Produce a shared object which can then be linked with other objects to
form an executable.  Not all systems support this option.  For predictable
results, you must also specify the same set of options used for compilation
(@option{-fpic}, @option{-fPIC}, or model suboptions) when
you specify this linker option.@footnote{On some systems, @samp{gcc -shared}
needs to build supplementary stub code for constructors to work.  On
multi-libbed systems, @samp{gcc -shared} must select the correct support
libraries to link against.  Failing to supply the correct flags may lead
to subtle defects.  Supplying them in cases where they are not necessary
is innocuous.}

@item -shared-libgcc
@itemx -static-libgcc
@opindex shared-libgcc
@opindex static-libgcc
On systems that provide @file{libgcc} as a shared library, these options
force the use of either the shared or static version, respectively.
If no shared version of @file{libgcc} was built when the compiler was
configured, these options have no effect.

There are several situations in which an application should use the
shared @file{libgcc} instead of the static version.  The most common
of these is when the application wishes to throw and catch exceptions
across different shared libraries.  In that case, each of the libraries
as well as the application itself should use the shared @file{libgcc}.

Therefore, the G++ and GCJ drivers automatically add
@option{-shared-libgcc} whenever you build a shared library or a main
executable, because C++ and Java programs typically use exceptions, so
this is the right thing to do.

If, instead, you use the LLVM driver to create shared libraries, you may
find that they are not always linked with the shared @file{libgcc}.
If LLVM finds, at its configuration time, that you have a non-GNU linker
or a GNU linker that does not support option @option{--eh-frame-hdr},
it links the shared version of @file{libgcc} into shared libraries
by default.  Otherwise, it takes advantage of the linker and optimizes
away the linking with the shared version of @file{libgcc}, linking with
the static version of libgcc by default.  This allows exceptions to
propagate through such shared libraries, without incurring relocation
costs at library load time.

However, if a library or main executable is supposed to throw or catch
exceptions, you must link it using the G++ or GCJ driver, as appropriate
for the languages used in the program, or using the option
@option{-shared-libgcc}, such that it is linked with the shared
@file{libgcc}.

@item -static-libasan
@opindex static-libasan
When the @option{-fsanitize=address} option is used to link a program,
the LLVM driver automatically links against @option{libasan}.  If
@file{libasan} is available as a shared library, and the @option{-static}
option is not used, then this links against the shared version of
@file{libasan}.  The @option{-static-libasan} option directs the LLVM
driver to link @file{libasan} statically, without necessarily linking
other libraries statically.

@item -static-libtsan
@opindex static-libtsan
When the @option{-fsanitize=thread} option is used to link a program,
the LLVM driver automatically links against @option{libtsan}.  If
@file{libtsan} is available as a shared library, and the @option{-static}
option is not used, then this links against the shared version of
@file{libtsan}.  The @option{-static-libtsan} option directs the LLVM
driver to link @file{libtsan} statically, without necessarily linking
other libraries statically.

@item -static-liblsan
@opindex static-liblsan
When the @option{-fsanitize=leak} option is used to link a program,
the LLVM driver automatically links against @option{liblsan}.  If
@file{liblsan} is available as a shared library, and the @option{-static}
option is not used, then this links against the shared version of
@file{liblsan}.  The @option{-static-liblsan} option directs the LLVM
driver to link @file{liblsan} statically, without necessarily linking
other libraries statically.

@item -static-libubsan
@opindex static-libubsan
When the @option{-fsanitize=undefined} option is used to link a program,
the LLVM driver automatically links against @option{libubsan}.  If
@file{libubsan} is available as a shared library, and the @option{-static}
option is not used, then this links against the shared version of
@file{libubsan}.  The @option{-static-libubsan} option directs the LLVM
driver to link @file{libubsan} statically, without necessarily linking
other libraries statically.

@item -static-libmpx
@opindex static-libmpx
When @option{-fcheck-pointer bounds} and @option{-mmpx} options are
used to link a program, the LLVM driver automatically links against
@option{libmpx}.  If @file{libmpx} is available as a shared library,
and the @option{-static} option is not used, then this links against
the shared version of @file{libmpx}.  The @option{-static-libmpx}
option directs the LLVM driver to link @file{libmpx} statically,
without necessarily linking other libraries statically.

@item -static-libmpxwrappers
@opindex static-libmpxwrappers
When @option{-fcheck-pointer bounds}, @option{-mmpx} options are used and
@option{-fno-chkp-use-wrappers} option is not used to link a program, the
LLVM driver automatically links against @option{libmpxwrappers}.  If
@file{libmpxwrappers} is available as a shared library, and the
@option{-static} option is not used, then this links against the shared
version of @file{libmpxwrappers}.  The @option{-static-libmpxwrappers}
option directs the LLVM driver to link @file{libmpxwrappers} statically,
without necessarily linking other libraries statically.

@item -static-libstdc++
@opindex static-libstdc++
When the @command{g++} program is used to link a C++ program, it
normally automatically links against @option{libstdc++}.  If
@file{libstdc++} is available as a shared library, and the
@option{-static} option is not used, then this links against the
shared version of @file{libstdc++}.  That is normally fine.  However, it
is sometimes useful to freeze the version of @file{libstdc++} used by
the program without going all the way to a fully static link.  The
@option{-static-libstdc++} option directs the @command{g++} driver to
link @file{libstdc++} statically, without necessarily linking other
libraries statically.

@item -symbolic
@opindex symbolic
Bind references to global symbols when building a shared object.  Warn
about any unresolved references (unless overridden by the link editor
option @option{-Xlinker -z -Xlinker defs}).  Only a few systems support
this option.

@item -T @var{script}
@opindex T
@cindex linker script
Use @var{script} as the linker script.  This option is supported by most
systems using the GNU linker.  On some targets, such as bare-board
targets without an operating system, the @option{-T} option may be required
when linking to avoid references to undefined symbols.

@item -Xlinker @var{option}
@opindex Xlinker
Pass @var{option} as an option to the linker.  You can use this to
supply system-specific linker options that LLVM does not recognize.

If you want to pass an option that takes a separate argument, you must use
@option{-Xlinker} twice, once for the option and once for the argument.
For example, to pass @option{-assert definitions}, you must write
@option{-Xlinker -assert -Xlinker definitions}.  It does not work to write
@option{-Xlinker "-assert definitions"}, because this passes the entire
string as a single argument, which is not what the linker expects.

When using the GNU linker, it is usually more convenient to pass
arguments to linker options using the @option{@var{option}=@var{value}}
syntax than as separate arguments.  For example, you can specify
@option{-Xlinker -Map=output.map} rather than
@option{-Xlinker -Map -Xlinker output.map}.  Other linkers may not support
this syntax for command-line options.

@item -Wl,@var{option}
@opindex Wl
Pass @var{option} as an option to the linker.  If @var{option} contains
commas, it is split into multiple options at the commas.  You can use this
syntax to pass an argument to the option.
For example, @option{-Wl,-Map,output.map} passes @option{-Map output.map} to the
linker.  When using the GNU linker, you can also get the same effect with
@option{-Wl,-Map=output.map}.

@item -u @var{symbol}
@opindex u
Pretend the symbol @var{symbol} is undefined, to force linking of
library modules to define it.  You can use @option{-u} multiple times with
different symbols to force loading of additional library modules.

@item -z @var{keyword}
@opindex z
@option{-z} is passed directly on to the linker along with the keyword
@var{keyword}. See the section in the documentation of your linker for
permitted values and their meanings.
@end table

@node Directory Options
@section Options for Directory Search
@cindex directory options
@cindex options, directory search
@cindex search path

These options specify directories to search for header files, for
libraries and for parts of the compiler:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -I@var{dir}
@opindex I
Add the directory @var{dir} to the head of the list of directories to be
searched for header files.  This can be used to override a system header
file, substituting your own version, since these directories are
searched before the system header file directories.  However, you should
not use this option to add directories that contain vendor-supplied
system header files (use @option{-isystem} for that).  If you use more than
one @option{-I} option, the directories are scanned in left-to-right
order; the standard system directories come after.

If a standard system include directory, or a directory specified with
@option{-isystem}, is also specified with @option{-I}, the @option{-I}
option is ignored.  The directory is still searched but as a
system directory at its normal position in the system include chain.
This is to ensure that LLVM's procedure to fix buggy system headers and
the ordering for the @code{include_next} directive are not inadvertently changed.
If you really need to change the search order for system directories,
use the @option{-nostdinc} and/or @option{-isystem} options.

@item -iplugindir=@var{dir}
@opindex iplugindir=
Set the directory to search for plugins that are passed
by @option{-fplugin=@var{name}} instead of
@option{-fplugin=@var{path}/@var{name}.so}.  This option is not meant
to be used by the user, but only passed by the driver.

@item -iquote@var{dir}
@opindex iquote
Add the directory @var{dir} to the head of the list of directories to
be searched for header files only for the case of @code{#include
"@var{file}"}; they are not searched for @code{#include <@var{file}>},
otherwise just like @option{-I}.

@item -L@var{dir}
@opindex L
Add directory @var{dir} to the list of directories to be searched
for @option{-l}.

@item -B@var{prefix}
@opindex B
This option specifies where to find the executables, libraries,
include files, and data files of the compiler itself.

The compiler driver program runs one or more of the subprograms
@command{cpp}, @command{cc1}, @command{as} and @command{ld}.  It tries
@var{prefix} as a prefix for each program it tries to run, both with and
without @samp{@var{machine}/@var{version}/} (@pxref{Target Options}).

For each subprogram to be run, the compiler driver first tries the
@option{-B} prefix, if any.  If that name is not found, or if @option{-B}
is not specified, the driver tries two standard prefixes,
@file{/usr/lib/gcc/} and @file{/usr/local/lib/gcc/}.  If neither of
those results in a file name that is found, the unmodified program
name is searched for using the directories specified in your
@env{PATH} environment variable.

The compiler checks to see if the path provided by the @option{-B}
refers to a directory, and if necessary it adds a directory
separator character at the end of the path.

@option{-B} prefixes that effectively specify directory names also apply
to libraries in the linker, because the compiler translates these
options into @option{-L} options for the linker.  They also apply to
include files in the preprocessor, because the compiler translates these
options into @option{-isystem} options for the preprocessor.  In this case,
the compiler appends @samp{include} to the prefix.

The runtime support file @file{libgcc.a} can also be searched for using
the @option{-B} prefix, if needed.  If it is not found there, the two
standard prefixes above are tried, and that is all.  The file is left
out of the link if it is not found by those means.

Another way to specify a prefix much like the @option{-B} prefix is to use
the environment variable @env{GCC_EXEC_PREFIX}.  @xref{Environment
Variables}.

As a special kludge, if the path provided by @option{-B} is
@file{[dir/]stage@var{N}/}, where @var{N} is a number in the range 0 to
9, then it is replaced by @file{[dir/]include}.  This is to help
with boot-strapping the compiler.

@item -specs=@var{file}
@opindex specs
Process @var{file} after the compiler reads in the standard @file{specs}
file, in order to override the defaults which the @command{clang} driver
program uses when determining what switches to pass to @command{cc1},
@command{cc1plus}, @command{as}, @command{ld}, etc.  More than one
@option{-specs=@var{file}} can be specified on the command line, and they
are processed in order, from left to right.

@item --sysroot=@var{dir}
@opindex sysroot
Use @var{dir} as the logical root directory for headers and libraries.
For example, if the compiler normally searches for headers in
@file{/usr/include} and libraries in @file{/usr/lib}, it instead
searches @file{@var{dir}/usr/include} and @file{@var{dir}/usr/lib}.

If you use both this option and the @option{-isysroot} option, then
the @option{--sysroot} option applies to libraries, but the
@option{-isysroot} option applies to header files.

The GNU linker (beginning with version 2.16) has the necessary support
for this option.  If your linker does not support this option, the
header file aspect of @option{--sysroot} still works, but the
library aspect does not.

@item --no-sysroot-suffix
@opindex no-sysroot-suffix
For some targets, a suffix is added to the root directory specified
with @option{--sysroot}, depending on the other options used, so that
headers may for example be found in
@file{@var{dir}/@var{suffix}/usr/include} instead of
@file{@var{dir}/usr/include}.  This option disables the addition of
such a suffix.

@item -I-
@opindex I-
This option has been deprecated.  Please use @option{-iquote} instead for
@option{-I} directories before the @option{-I-} and remove the @option{-I-}.
Any directories you specify with @option{-I} options before the @option{-I-}
option are searched only for the case of @code{#include "@var{file}"};
they are not searched for @code{#include <@var{file}>}.

If additional directories are specified with @option{-I} options after
the @option{-I-}, these directories are searched for all @code{#include}
directives.  (Ordinarily @emph{all} @option{-I} directories are used
this way.)

In addition, the @option{-I-} option inhibits the use of the current
directory (where the current input file came from) as the first search
directory for @code{#include "@var{file}"}.  There is no way to
override this effect of @option{-I-}.  With @option{-I.} you can specify
searching the directory that is current when the compiler is
invoked.  That is not exactly the same as what the preprocessor does
by default, but it is often satisfactory.

@option{-I-} does not inhibit the use of the standard system directories
for header files.  Thus, @option{-I-} and @option{-nostdinc} are
independent.
@end table

@c man end

@node Spec Files
@section Specifying Subprocesses and the Switches to Pass to Them
@cindex Spec Files

@command{clang} is a driver program.  It performs its job by invoking a
sequence of other programs to do the work of compiling, assembling and
linking.  LLVM interprets its command-line parameters and uses these to
deduce which programs it should invoke, and which command-line options
it ought to place on their command lines.  This behavior is controlled
by @dfn{spec strings}.  In most cases there is one spec string for each
program that LLVM can invoke, but a few programs have multiple spec
strings to control their behavior.  The spec strings built into LLVM can
be overridden by using the @option{-specs=} command-line switch to specify
a spec file.

@dfn{Spec files} are plaintext files that are used to construct spec
strings.  They consist of a sequence of directives separated by blank
lines.  The type of directive is determined by the first non-whitespace
character on the line, which can be one of the following:

@table @code
@item %@var{command}
Issues a @var{command} to the spec file processor.  The commands that can
appear here are:

@table @code
@item %include <@var{file}>
@cindex @code{%include}
Search for @var{file} and insert its text at the current point in the
specs file.

@item %include_noerr <@var{file}>
@cindex @code{%include_noerr}
Just like @samp{%include}, but do not generate an error message if the include
file cannot be found.

@item %rename @var{old_name} @var{new_name}
@cindex @code{%rename}
Rename the spec string @var{old_name} to @var{new_name}.

@end table

@item *[@var{spec_name}]:
This tells the compiler to create, override or delete the named spec
string.  All lines after this directive up to the next directive or
blank line are considered to be the text for the spec string.  If this
results in an empty string then the spec is deleted.  (Or, if the
spec did not exist, then nothing happens.)  Otherwise, if the spec
does not currently exist a new spec is created.  If the spec does
exist then its contents are overridden by the text of this
directive, unless the first character of that text is the @samp{+}
character, in which case the text is appended to the spec.

@item [@var{suffix}]:
Creates a new @samp{[@var{suffix}] spec} pair.  All lines after this directive
and up to the next directive or blank line are considered to make up the
spec string for the indicated suffix.  When the compiler encounters an
input file with the named suffix, it processes the spec string in
order to work out how to compile that file.  For example:

@smallexample
.ZZ:
z-compile -input %i
@end smallexample

This says that any input file whose name ends in @samp{.ZZ} should be
passed to the program @samp{z-compile}, which should be invoked with the
command-line switch @option{-input} and with the result of performing the
@samp{%i} substitution.  (See below.)

As an alternative to providing a spec string, the text following a
suffix directive can be one of the following:

@table @code
@item @@@var{language}
This says that the suffix is an alias for a known @var{language}.  This is
similar to using the @option{-x} command-line switch to LLVM to specify a
language explicitly.  For example:

@smallexample
.ZZ:
@@c++
@end smallexample

Says that .ZZ files are, in fact, C++ source files.

@item #@var{name}
This causes an error messages saying:

@smallexample
@var{name} compiler not installed on this system.
@end smallexample
@end table

LLVM already has an extensive list of suffixes built into it.
This directive adds an entry to the end of the list of suffixes, but
since the list is searched from the end backwards, it is effectively
possible to override earlier entries using this technique.

@end table

LLVM has the following spec strings built into it.  Spec files can
override these strings or create their own.  Note that individual
targets can also add their own spec strings to this list.

@smallexample
asm          Options to pass to the assembler
asm_final    Options to pass to the assembler post-processor
cpp          Options to pass to the C preprocessor
cc1          Options to pass to the C compiler
cc1plus      Options to pass to the C++ compiler
endfile      Object files to include at the end of the link
link         Options to pass to the linker
lib          Libraries to include on the command line to the linker
libgcc       Decides which LLVM support library to pass to the linker
linker       Sets the name of the linker
predefines   Defines to be passed to the C preprocessor
signed_char  Defines to pass to CPP to say whether @code{char} is signed
             by default
startfile    Object files to include at the start of the link
@end smallexample

Here is a small example of a spec file:

@smallexample
%rename lib                 old_lib

*lib:
--start-group -lgcc -lc -leval1 --end-group %(old_lib)
@end smallexample

This example renames the spec called @samp{lib} to @samp{old_lib} and
then overrides the previous definition of @samp{lib} with a new one.
The new definition adds in some extra command-line options before
including the text of the old definition.

@dfn{Spec strings} are a list of command-line options to be passed to their
corresponding program.  In addition, the spec strings can contain
@samp{%}-prefixed sequences to substitute variable text or to
conditionally insert text into the command line.  Using these constructs
it is possible to generate quite complex command lines.

Here is a table of all defined @samp{%}-sequences for spec
strings.  Note that spaces are not generated automatically around the
results of expanding these sequences.  Therefore you can concatenate them
together or combine them with constant text in a single argument.

@table @code
@item %%
Substitute one @samp{%} into the program name or argument.

@item %i
Substitute the name of the input file being processed.

@item %b
Substitute the basename of the input file being processed.
This is the substring up to (and not including) the last period
and not including the directory.

@item %B
This is the same as @samp{%b}, but include the file suffix (text after
the last period).

@item %d
Marks the argument containing or following the @samp{%d} as a
temporary file name, so that that file is deleted if LLVM exits
successfully.  Unlike @samp{%g}, this contributes no text to the
argument.

@item %g@var{suffix}
Substitute a file name that has suffix @var{suffix} and is chosen
once per compilation, and mark the argument in the same way as
@samp{%d}.  To reduce exposure to denial-of-service attacks, the file
name is now chosen in a way that is hard to predict even when previously
chosen file names are known.  For example, @samp{%g.s @dots{} %g.o @dots{} %g.s}
might turn into @samp{ccUVUUAU.s ccXYAXZ12.o ccUVUUAU.s}.  @var{suffix} matches
the regexp @samp{[.A-Za-z]*} or the special string @samp{%O}, which is
treated exactly as if @samp{%O} had been preprocessed.  Previously, @samp{%g}
was simply substituted with a file name chosen once per compilation,
without regard to any appended suffix (which was therefore treated
just like ordinary text), making such attacks more likely to succeed.

@item %u@var{suffix}
Like @samp{%g}, but generates a new temporary file name
each time it appears instead of once per compilation.

@item %U@var{suffix}
Substitutes the last file name generated with @samp{%u@var{suffix}}, generating a
new one if there is no such last file name.  In the absence of any
@samp{%u@var{suffix}}, this is just like @samp{%g@var{suffix}}, except they don't share
the same suffix @emph{space}, so @samp{%g.s @dots{} %U.s @dots{} %g.s @dots{} %U.s}
involves the generation of two distinct file names, one
for each @samp{%g.s} and another for each @samp{%U.s}.  Previously, @samp{%U} was
simply substituted with a file name chosen for the previous @samp{%u},
without regard to any appended suffix.

@item %j@var{suffix}
Substitutes the name of the @code{HOST_BIT_BUCKET}, if any, and if it is
writable, and if @option{-save-temps} is not used;
otherwise, substitute the name
of a temporary file, just like @samp{%u}.  This temporary file is not
meant for communication between processes, but rather as a junk
disposal mechanism.

@item %|@var{suffix}
@itemx %m@var{suffix}
Like @samp{%g}, except if @option{-pipe} is in effect.  In that case
@samp{%|} substitutes a single dash and @samp{%m} substitutes nothing at
all.  These are the two most common ways to instruct a program that it
should read from standard input or write to standard output.  If you
need something more elaborate you can use an @samp{%@{pipe:@code{X}@}}
construct: see for example @file{f/lang-specs.h}.

@item %.@var{SUFFIX}
Substitutes @var{.SUFFIX} for the suffixes of a matched switch's args
when it is subsequently output with @samp{%*}.  @var{SUFFIX} is
terminated by the next space or %.

@item %w
Marks the argument containing or following the @samp{%w} as the
designated output file of this compilation.  This puts the argument
into the sequence of arguments that @samp{%o} substitutes.

@item %o
Substitutes the names of all the output files, with spaces
automatically placed around them.  You should write spaces
around the @samp{%o} as well or the results are undefined.
@samp{%o} is for use in the specs for running the linker.
Input files whose names have no recognized suffix are not compiled
at all, but they are included among the output files, so they are
linked.

@item %O
Substitutes the suffix for object files.  Note that this is
handled specially when it immediately follows @samp{%g, %u, or %U},
because of the need for those to form complete file names.  The
handling is such that @samp{%O} is treated exactly as if it had already
been substituted, except that @samp{%g, %u, and %U} do not currently
support additional @var{suffix} characters following @samp{%O} as they do
following, for example, @samp{.o}.

@item %p
Substitutes the standard macro predefinitions for the
current target machine.  Use this when running @command{cpp}.

@item %P
Like @samp{%p}, but puts @samp{__} before and after the name of each
predefined macro, except for macros that start with @samp{__} or with
@samp{_@var{L}}, where @var{L} is an uppercase letter.  This is for ISO
C@.

@item %I
Substitute any of @option{-iprefix} (made from @env{GCC_EXEC_PREFIX}),
@option{-isysroot} (made from @env{TARGET_SYSTEM_ROOT}),
@option{-isystem} (made from @env{COMPILER_PATH} and @option{-B} options)
and @option{-imultilib} as necessary.

@item %s
Current argument is the name of a library or startup file of some sort.
Search for that file in a standard list of directories and substitute
the full name found.  The current working directory is included in the
list of directories scanned.

@item %T
Current argument is the name of a linker script.  Search for that file
in the current list of directories to scan for libraries. If the file
is located insert a @option{--script} option into the command line
followed by the full path name found.  If the file is not found then
generate an error message.  Note: the current working directory is not
searched.

@item %e@var{str}
Print @var{str} as an error message.  @var{str} is terminated by a newline.
Use this when inconsistent options are detected.

@item %(@var{name})
Substitute the contents of spec string @var{name} at this point.

@item %x@{@var{option}@}
Accumulate an option for @samp{%X}.

@item %X
Output the accumulated linker options specified by @option{-Wl} or a @samp{%x}
spec string.

@item %Y
Output the accumulated assembler options specified by @option{-Wa}.

@item %Z
Output the accumulated preprocessor options specified by @option{-Wp}.

@item %a
Process the @code{asm} spec.  This is used to compute the
switches to be passed to the assembler.

@item %A
Process the @code{asm_final} spec.  This is a spec string for
passing switches to an assembler post-processor, if such a program is
needed.

@item %l
Process the @code{link} spec.  This is the spec for computing the
command line passed to the linker.  Typically it makes use of the
@samp{%L %G %S %D and %E} sequences.

@item %D
Dump out a @option{-L} option for each directory that LLVM believes might
contain startup files.  If the target supports multilibs then the
current multilib directory is prepended to each of these paths.

@item %L
Process the @code{lib} spec.  This is a spec string for deciding which
libraries are included on the command line to the linker.

@item %G
Process the @code{libgcc} spec.  This is a spec string for deciding
which LLVM support library is included on the command line to the linker.

@item %S
Process the @code{startfile} spec.  This is a spec for deciding which
object files are the first ones passed to the linker.  Typically
this might be a file named @file{crt0.o}.

@item %E
Process the @code{endfile} spec.  This is a spec string that specifies
the last object files that are passed to the linker.

@item %C
Process the @code{cpp} spec.  This is used to construct the arguments
to be passed to the C preprocessor.

@item %1
Process the @code{cc1} spec.  This is used to construct the options to be
passed to the actual C compiler (@command{cc1}).

@item %2
Process the @code{cc1plus} spec.  This is used to construct the options to be
passed to the actual C++ compiler (@command{cc1plus}).

@item %*
Substitute the variable part of a matched option.  See below.
Note that each comma in the substituted string is replaced by
a single space.

@item %<@code{S}
Remove all occurrences of @code{-S} from the command line.  Note---this
command is position dependent.  @samp{%} commands in the spec string
before this one see @code{-S}, @samp{%} commands in the spec string
after this one do not.

@item %:@var{function}(@var{args})
Call the named function @var{function}, passing it @var{args}.
@var{args} is first processed as a nested spec string, then split
into an argument vector in the usual fashion.  The function returns
a string which is processed as if it had appeared literally as part
of the current spec.

The following built-in spec functions are provided:

@table @code
@item @code{getenv}
The @code{getenv} spec function takes two arguments: an environment
variable name and a string.  If the environment variable is not
defined, a fatal error is issued.  Otherwise, the return value is the
value of the environment variable concatenated with the string.  For
example, if @env{TOPDIR} is defined as @file{/path/to/top}, then:

@smallexample
%:getenv(TOPDIR /include)
@end smallexample

expands to @file{/path/to/top/include}.

@item @code{if-exists}
The @code{if-exists} spec function takes one argument, an absolute
pathname to a file.  If the file exists, @code{if-exists} returns the
pathname.  Here is a small example of its usage:

@smallexample
*startfile:
crt0%O%s %:if-exists(crti%O%s) crtbegin%O%s
@end smallexample

@item @code{if-exists-else}
The @code{if-exists-else} spec function is similar to the @code{if-exists}
spec function, except that it takes two arguments.  The first argument is
an absolute pathname to a file.  If the file exists, @code{if-exists-else}
returns the pathname.  If it does not exist, it returns the second argument.
This way, @code{if-exists-else} can be used to select one file or another,
based on the existence of the first.  Here is a small example of its usage:

@smallexample
*startfile:
crt0%O%s %:if-exists(crti%O%s) \
%:if-exists-else(crtbeginT%O%s crtbegin%O%s)
@end smallexample

@item @code{replace-outfile}
The @code{replace-outfile} spec function takes two arguments.  It looks for the
first argument in the outfiles array and replaces it with the second argument.  Here
is a small example of its usage:

@smallexample
%@{fgnu-runtime:%:replace-outfile(-lobjc -lobjc-gnu)@}
@end smallexample

@item @code{remove-outfile}
The @code{remove-outfile} spec function takes one argument.  It looks for the
first argument in the outfiles array and removes it.  Here is a small example
its usage:

@smallexample
%:remove-outfile(-lm)
@end smallexample

@item @code{pass-through-libs}
The @code{pass-through-libs} spec function takes any number of arguments.  It
finds any @option{-l} options and any non-options ending in @file{.a} (which it
assumes are the names of linker input library archive files) and returns a
result containing all the found arguments each prepended by
@option{-plugin-opt=-pass-through=} and joined by spaces.  This list is
intended to be passed to the LTO linker plugin.

@smallexample
%:pass-through-libs(%G %L %G)
@end smallexample

@item @code{print-asm-header}
The @code{print-asm-header} function takes no arguments and simply
prints a banner like:

@smallexample
Assembler options
=================

Use "-Wa,OPTION" to pass "OPTION" to the assembler.
@end smallexample

It is used to separate compiler options from assembler options
in the @option{--target-help} output.
@end table

@item %@{@code{S}@}
Substitutes the @code{-S} switch, if that switch is given to LLVM@.
If that switch is not specified, this substitutes nothing.  Note that
the leading dash is omitted when specifying this option, and it is
automatically inserted if the substitution is performed.  Thus the spec
string @samp{%@{foo@}} matches the command-line option @option{-foo}
and outputs the command-line option @option{-foo}.

@item %W@{@code{S}@}
Like %@{@code{S}@} but mark last argument supplied within as a file to be
deleted on failure.

@item %@{@code{S}*@}
Substitutes all the switches specified to LLVM whose names start
with @code{-S}, but which also take an argument.  This is used for
switches like @option{-o}, @option{-D}, @option{-I}, etc.
LLVM considers @option{-o foo} as being
one switch whose name starts with @samp{o}.  %@{o*@} substitutes this
text, including the space.  Thus two arguments are generated.

@item %@{@code{S}*&@code{T}*@}
Like %@{@code{S}*@}, but preserve order of @code{S} and @code{T} options
(the order of @code{S} and @code{T} in the spec is not significant).
There can be any number of ampersand-separated variables; for each the
wild card is optional.  Useful for CPP as @samp{%@{D*&U*&A*@}}.

@item %@{@code{S}:@code{X}@}
Substitutes @code{X}, if the @option{-S} switch is given to LLVM@.

@item %@{!@code{S}:@code{X}@}
Substitutes @code{X}, if the @option{-S} switch is @emph{not} given to LLVM@.

@item %@{@code{S}*:@code{X}@}
Substitutes @code{X} if one or more switches whose names start with
@code{-S} are specified to LLVM@.  Normally @code{X} is substituted only
once, no matter how many such switches appeared.  However, if @code{%*}
appears somewhere in @code{X}, then @code{X} is substituted once
for each matching switch, with the @code{%*} replaced by the part of
that switch matching the @code{*}.

If @code{%*} appears as the last part of a spec sequence then a space
is added after the end of the last substitution.  If there is more
text in the sequence, however, then a space is not generated.  This
allows the @code{%*} substitution to be used as part of a larger
string.  For example, a spec string like this:

@smallexample
%@{mcu=*:--script=%*/memory.ld@}
@end smallexample

@noindent
when matching an option like @option{-mcu=newchip} produces:

@smallexample
--script=newchip/memory.ld
@end smallexample

@item %@{.@code{S}:@code{X}@}
Substitutes @code{X}, if processing a file with suffix @code{S}.

@item %@{!.@code{S}:@code{X}@}
Substitutes @code{X}, if @emph{not} processing a file with suffix @code{S}.

@item %@{,@code{S}:@code{X}@}
Substitutes @code{X}, if processing a file for language @code{S}.

@item %@{!,@code{S}:@code{X}@}
Substitutes @code{X}, if not processing a file for language @code{S}.

@item %@{@code{S}|@code{P}:@code{X}@}
Substitutes @code{X} if either @code{-S} or @code{-P} is given to
LLVM@.  This may be combined with @samp{!}, @samp{.}, @samp{,}, and
@code{*} sequences as well, although they have a stronger binding than
the @samp{|}.  If @code{%*} appears in @code{X}, all of the
alternatives must be starred, and only the first matching alternative
is substituted.

For example, a spec string like this:

@smallexample
%@{.c:-foo@} %@{!.c:-bar@} %@{.c|d:-baz@} %@{!.c|d:-boggle@}
@end smallexample

@noindent
outputs the following command-line options from the following input
command-line options:

@smallexample
fred.c        -foo -baz
jim.d         -bar -boggle
-d fred.c     -foo -baz -boggle
-d jim.d      -bar -baz -boggle
@end smallexample

@item %@{S:X; T:Y; :D@}

If @code{S} is given to LLVM, substitutes @code{X}; else if @code{T} is
given to LLVM, substitutes @code{Y}; else substitutes @code{D}.  There can
be as many clauses as you need.  This may be combined with @code{.},
@code{,}, @code{!}, @code{|}, and @code{*} as needed.


@end table

The conditional text @code{X} in a %@{@code{S}:@code{X}@} or similar
construct may contain other nested @samp{%} constructs or spaces, or
even newlines.  They are processed as usual, as described above.
Trailing white space in @code{X} is ignored.  White space may also
appear anywhere on the left side of the colon in these constructs,
except between @code{.} or @code{*} and the corresponding word.

The @option{-O}, @option{-f}, @option{-m}, and @option{-W} switches are
handled specifically in these constructs.  If another value of
@option{-O} or the negated form of a @option{-f}, @option{-m}, or
@option{-W} switch is found later in the command line, the earlier
switch value is ignored, except with @{@code{S}*@} where @code{S} is
just one letter, which passes all matching options.

The character @samp{|} at the beginning of the predicate text is used to
indicate that a command should be piped to the following command, but
only if @option{-pipe} is specified.

It is built into LLVM which switches take arguments and which do not.
(You might think it would be useful to generalize this to allow each
compiler's spec to say which switches take arguments.  But this cannot
be done in a consistent fashion.  LLVM cannot even decide which input
files have been specified without knowing which switches take arguments,
and it must know which input files to compile in order to tell which
compilers to run).

LLVM also knows implicitly that arguments starting in @option{-l} are to be
treated as compiler output files, and passed to the linker in their
proper position among the other output files.

@c man begin OPTIONS

@node Target Options
@section Specifying Target Machine and Compiler Version
@cindex target options
@cindex cross compiling
@cindex specifying machine version
@cindex specifying compiler version and target machine
@cindex compiler version, specifying
@cindex target machine, specifying

The usual way to run LLVM is to run the executable called @command{clang}, or
@command{@var{machine}-gcc} when cross-compiling, or
@command{@var{machine}-gcc-@var{version}} to run a version other than the
one that was installed last.

@node Submodel Options
@section Hardware Models and Configurations
@cindex submodel options
@cindex specifying hardware config
@cindex hardware models and configurations, specifying
@cindex machine dependent options

Each target machine types can have its own
special options, starting with @samp{-m}, to choose among various
hardware models or configurations---for example, 68010 vs 68020,
floating coprocessor or none.  A single installed version of the
compiler can compile for any model or configuration, according to the
options specified.

Some configurations of the compiler also support additional special
options, usually for compatibility with other compilers on the same
platform.

@c This list is ordered alphanumerically by subsection name.
@c It should be the same order and spelling as these options are listed
@c in Machine Dependent Options

@menu
* AArch64 Options::
* ARM Options::
* Darwin Options::
* Hexagon Options::
* GNU/Linux Options::
* MIPS Options::
* MSP430 Options::
* Nvidia PTX Options::
* PowerPC Options::
* RS/6000 and PowerPC Options::
* S/390 and zSeries Options::
* Solaris 2 Options::
* SPARC Options::
* System V Options::
* VMS Options::
* VxWorks Options::
* x86 Options::
* x86 Windows Options::
* XCore Options::
* zSeries Options::
@end menu

@node AArch64 Options
@subsection AArch64 Options
@cindex AArch64 Options

These options are defined for AArch64 implementations:

@table @gcctabopt

@item -mabi=@var{name}
@opindex mabi
Generate code for the specified data model.  Permissible values
are @samp{ilp32} for SysV-like data model where int, long int and pointer
are 32-bit, and @samp{lp64} for SysV-like data model where int is 32-bit,
but long int and pointer are 64-bit.

The default depends on the specific target configuration.  Note that
the LP64 and ILP32 ABIs are not link-compatible; you must compile your
entire program with the same ABI, and link with a compatible set of libraries.

@item -mbig-endian
@opindex mbig-endian
Generate big-endian code.  This is the default when LLVM is configured for an
@samp{aarch64_be-*-*} target.

@item -mgeneral-regs-only
@opindex mgeneral-regs-only
Generate code which uses only the general registers.

@item -mlittle-endian
@opindex mlittle-endian
Generate little-endian code.  This is the default when LLVM is configured for an
@samp{aarch64-*-*} but not an @samp{aarch64_be-*-*} target.

@item -mcmodel=tiny
@opindex mcmodel=tiny
Generate code for the tiny code model.  The program and its statically defined
symbols must be within 1GB of each other.  Pointers are 64 bits.  Programs can
be statically or dynamically linked.  This model is not fully implemented and
mostly treated as @samp{small}.

@item -mcmodel=small
@opindex mcmodel=small
Generate code for the small code model.  The program and its statically defined
symbols must be within 4GB of each other.  Pointers are 64 bits.  Programs can
be statically or dynamically linked.  This is the default code model.

@item -mcmodel=large
@opindex mcmodel=large
Generate code for the large code model.  This makes no assumptions about
addresses and sizes of sections.  Pointers are 64 bits.  Programs can be
statically linked only.

@item -mstrict-align
@opindex mstrict-align
Do not assume that unaligned memory references are handled by the system.

@item -momit-leaf-frame-pointer
@itemx -mno-omit-leaf-frame-pointer
@opindex momit-leaf-frame-pointer
@opindex mno-omit-leaf-frame-pointer
Omit or keep the frame pointer in leaf functions.  The former behaviour is the
default.

@item -mtls-dialect=desc
@opindex mtls-dialect=desc
Use TLS descriptors as the thread-local storage mechanism for dynamic accesses
of TLS variables.  This is the default.

@item -mtls-dialect=traditional
@opindex mtls-dialect=traditional
Use traditional TLS as the thread-local storage mechanism for dynamic accesses
of TLS variables.

@item -mfix-cortex-a53-835769
@itemx -mno-fix-cortex-a53-835769
@opindex mfix-cortex-a53-835769
@opindex mno-fix-cortex-a53-835769
Enable or disable the workaround for the ARM Cortex-A53 erratum number 835769.
This involves inserting a NOP instruction between memory instructions and
64-bit integer multiply-accumulate instructions.

@item -march=@var{name}
@opindex march
Specify the name of the target architecture, optionally suffixed by one or
more feature modifiers.  This option has the form
@option{-march=@var{arch}@r{@{}+@r{[}no@r{]}@var{feature}@r{@}*}}, where the
only permissible value for @var{arch} is @samp{armv8-a}.  The permissible
values for @var{feature} are documented in the sub-section below.

Where conflicting feature modifiers are specified, the right-most feature is
used.

LLVM uses this name to determine what kind of instructions it can emit when
generating assembly code.

Where @option{-march} is specified without either of @option{-mtune}
or @option{-mcpu} also being specified, the code is tuned to perform
well across a range of target processors implementing the target
architecture.

@item -mtune=@var{name}
@opindex mtune
Specify the name of the target processor for which LLVM should tune the
performance of the code.  Permissible values for this option are:
@samp{generic}, @samp{cortex-a53}, @samp{cortex-a57},
@samp{cortex-a72}, @samp{thunderx}, @samp{xgene1}.

Additionally, this option can specify that LLVM should tune the performance
of the code for a big.LITTLE system.  Permissible values for this
option are: @samp{cortex-a57.cortex-a53}, @samp{cortex-a72.cortex-a53}.

Where none of @option{-mtune=}, @option{-mcpu=} or @option{-march=}
are specified, the code is tuned to perform well across a range
of target processors.

This option cannot be suffixed by feature modifiers.

@item -mcpu=@var{name}
@opindex mcpu
Specify the name of the target processor, optionally suffixed by one or more
feature modifiers.  This option has the form
@option{-mcpu=@var{cpu}@r{@{}+@r{[}no@r{]}@var{feature}@r{@}*}}, where the
permissible values for @var{cpu} are the same as those available for
@option{-mtune}.

The permissible values for @var{feature} are documented in the sub-section
below.

Where conflicting feature modifiers are specified, the right-most feature is
used.

LLVM uses this name to determine what kind of instructions it can emit when
generating assembly code (as if by @option{-march}) and to determine
the target processor for which to tune for performance (as if
by @option{-mtune}).  Where this option is used in conjunction
with @option{-march} or @option{-mtune}, those options take precedence
over the appropriate part of this option.
@end table

@subsubsection @option{-march} and @option{-mcpu} Feature Modifiers
@cindex @option{-march} feature modifiers
@cindex @option{-mcpu} feature modifiers
Feature modifiers used with @option{-march} and @option{-mcpu} can be one
the following:

@table @samp
@item crc
Enable CRC extension.
@item crypto
Enable Crypto extension.  This implies Advanced SIMD is enabled.
@item fp
Enable floating-point instructions.
@item simd
Enable Advanced SIMD instructions.  This implies floating-point instructions
are enabled.  This is the default for all current possible values for options
@option{-march} and @option{-mcpu=}.
@end table

@node ARM Options
@subsection ARM Options
@cindex ARM options

These @samp{-m} options are defined for the ARM port:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -mabi=@var{name}
@opindex mabi
Generate code for the specified ABI@.  Permissible values are: @samp{apcs-gnu},
@samp{atpcs}, @samp{aapcs}, @samp{aapcs-linux} and @samp{iwmmxt}.

@item -mapcs-frame
@opindex mapcs-frame
Generate a stack frame that is compliant with the ARM Procedure Call
Standard for all functions, even if this is not strictly necessary for
correct execution of the code.  Specifying @option{-fomit-frame-pointer}
with this option causes the stack frames not to be generated for
leaf functions.  The default is @option{-mno-apcs-frame}.
This option is deprecated.

@item -mapcs
@opindex mapcs
This is a synonym for @option{-mapcs-frame} and is deprecated.

@ignore
@c not currently implemented
@item -mapcs-stack-check
@opindex mapcs-stack-check
Generate code to check the amount of stack space available upon entry to
every function (that actually uses some stack space).  If there is
insufficient space available then either the function
@code{__rt_stkovf_split_small} or @code{__rt_stkovf_split_big} is
called, depending upon the amount of stack space required.  The runtime
system is required to provide these functions.  The default is
@option{-mno-apcs-stack-check}, since this produces smaller code.

@c not currently implemented
@item -mapcs-float
@opindex mapcs-float
Pass floating-point arguments using the floating-point registers.  This is
one of the variants of the APCS@.  This option is recommended if the
target hardware has a floating-point unit or if a lot of floating-point
arithmetic is going to be performed by the code.  The default is
@option{-mno-apcs-float}, since the size of integer-only code is
slightly increased if @option{-mapcs-float} is used.

@c not currently implemented
@item -mapcs-reentrant
@opindex mapcs-reentrant
Generate reentrant, position-independent code.  The default is
@option{-mno-apcs-reentrant}.
@end ignore

@item -mthumb-interwork
@opindex mthumb-interwork
Generate code that supports calling between the ARM and Thumb
instruction sets.  Without this option, on pre-v5 architectures, the
two instruction sets cannot be reliably used inside one program.  The
default is @option{-mno-thumb-interwork}, since slightly larger code
is generated when @option{-mthumb-interwork} is specified.  In AAPCS
configurations this option is meaningless.

@item -mno-sched-prolog
@opindex mno-sched-prolog
Prevent the reordering of instructions in the function prologue, or the
merging of those instruction with the instructions in the function's
body.  This means that all functions start with a recognizable set
of instructions (or in fact one of a choice from a small set of
different function prologues), and this information can be used to
locate the start of functions inside an executable piece of code.  The
default is @option{-msched-prolog}.

@item -mfloat-abi=@var{name}
@opindex mfloat-abi
Specifies which floating-point ABI to use.  Permissible values
are: @samp{soft}, @samp{softfp} and @samp{hard}.

Specifying @samp{soft} causes LLVM to generate output containing
library calls for floating-point operations.
@samp{softfp} allows the generation of code using hardware floating-point
instructions, but still uses the soft-float calling conventions.
@samp{hard} allows generation of floating-point instructions
and uses FPU-specific calling conventions.

The default depends on the specific target configuration.  Note that
the hard-float and soft-float ABIs are not link-compatible; you must
compile your entire program with the same ABI, and link with a
compatible set of libraries.

@item -mlittle-endian
@opindex mlittle-endian
Generate code for a processor running in little-endian mode.  This is
the default for all standard configurations.

@item -mbig-endian
@opindex mbig-endian
Generate code for a processor running in big-endian mode; the default is
to compile code for a little-endian processor.

@item -march=@var{name}
@opindex march
This specifies the name of the target ARM architecture.  LLVM uses this
name to determine what kind of instructions it can emit when generating
assembly code.  This option can be used in conjunction with or instead
of the @option{-mcpu=} option.  Permissible names are: @samp{armv2},
@samp{armv2a}, @samp{armv3}, @samp{armv3m}, @samp{armv4}, @samp{armv4t},
@samp{armv5}, @samp{armv5t}, @samp{armv5e}, @samp{armv5te},
@samp{armv6}, @samp{armv6j},
@samp{armv6t2}, @samp{armv6z}, @samp{armv6zk}, @samp{armv6-m},
@samp{armv7}, @samp{armv7-a}, @samp{armv7-r}, @samp{armv7-m}, @samp{armv7e-m},
@samp{armv7ve}, @samp{armv8-a}, @samp{armv8-a+crc},
@samp{iwmmxt}, @samp{iwmmxt2}, @samp{ep9312}.

@option{-march=armv7ve} is the armv7-a architecture with virtualization
extensions.

@option{-march=armv8-a+crc} enables code generation for the ARMv8-A
architecture together with the optional CRC32 extensions.

@option{-march=native} causes the compiler to auto-detect the architecture
of the build computer.  At present, this feature is only supported on
GNU/Linux, and not all architectures are recognized.  If the auto-detect
is unsuccessful the option has no effect.

@item -mtune=@var{name}
@opindex mtune
This option specifies the name of the target ARM processor for
which LLVM should tune the performance of the code.
For some ARM implementations better performance can be obtained by using
this option.
Permissible names are: @samp{arm2}, @samp{arm250},
@samp{arm3}, @samp{arm6}, @samp{arm60}, @samp{arm600}, @samp{arm610},
@samp{arm620}, @samp{arm7}, @samp{arm7m}, @samp{arm7d}, @samp{arm7dm},
@samp{arm7di}, @samp{arm7dmi}, @samp{arm70}, @samp{arm700},
@samp{arm700i}, @samp{arm710}, @samp{arm710c}, @samp{arm7100},
@samp{arm720},
@samp{arm7500}, @samp{arm7500fe}, @samp{arm7tdmi}, @samp{arm7tdmi-s},
@samp{arm710t}, @samp{arm720t}, @samp{arm740t},
@samp{strongarm}, @samp{strongarm110}, @samp{strongarm1100},
@samp{strongarm1110},
@samp{arm8}, @samp{arm810}, @samp{arm9}, @samp{arm9e}, @samp{arm920},
@samp{arm920t}, @samp{arm922t}, @samp{arm946e-s}, @samp{arm966e-s},
@samp{arm968e-s}, @samp{arm926ej-s}, @samp{arm940t}, @samp{arm9tdmi},
@samp{arm10tdmi}, @samp{arm1020t}, @samp{arm1026ej-s},
@samp{arm10e}, @samp{arm1020e}, @samp{arm1022e},
@samp{arm1136j-s}, @samp{arm1136jf-s}, @samp{mpcore}, @samp{mpcorenovfp},
@samp{arm1156t2-s}, @samp{arm1156t2f-s}, @samp{arm1176jz-s}, @samp{arm1176jzf-s},
@samp{cortex-a5}, @samp{cortex-a7}, @samp{cortex-a8}, @samp{cortex-a9},
@samp{cortex-a12}, @samp{cortex-a15}, @samp{cortex-a53},
@samp{cortex-a57}, @samp{cortex-a72},
@samp{cortex-r4},
@samp{cortex-r4f}, @samp{cortex-r5}, @samp{cortex-r7}, @samp{cortex-m7},
@samp{cortex-m4},
@samp{cortex-m3},
@samp{cortex-m1},
@samp{cortex-m0},
@samp{cortex-m0plus},
@samp{cortex-m1.small-multiply},
@samp{cortex-m0.small-multiply},
@samp{cortex-m0plus.small-multiply},
@samp{marvell-pj4},
@samp{xscale}, @samp{iwmmxt}, @samp{iwmmxt2}, @samp{ep9312},
@samp{fa526}, @samp{fa626},
@samp{fa606te}, @samp{fa626te}, @samp{fmp626}, @samp{fa726te},
@samp{xgene1}.

Additionally, this option can specify that LLVM should tune the performance
of the code for a big.LITTLE system.  Permissible names are:
@samp{cortex-a15.cortex-a7}, @samp{cortex-a57.cortex-a53},
@samp{cortex-a72.cortex-a53}.

@option{-mtune=generic-@var{arch}} specifies that LLVM should tune the
performance for a blend of processors within architecture @var{arch}.
The aim is to generate code that run well on the current most popular
processors, balancing between optimizations that benefit some CPUs in the
range, and avoiding performance pitfalls of other CPUs.  The effects of
this option may change in future LLVM versions as CPU models come and go.

@option{-mtune=native} causes the compiler to auto-detect the CPU
of the build computer.  At present, this feature is only supported on
GNU/Linux, and not all architectures are recognized.  If the auto-detect is
unsuccessful the option has no effect.

@item -mcpu=@var{name}
@opindex mcpu
This specifies the name of the target ARM processor.  LLVM uses this name
to derive the name of the target ARM architecture (as if specified
by @option{-march}) and the ARM processor type for which to tune for
performance (as if specified by @option{-mtune}).  Where this option
is used in conjunction with @option{-march} or @option{-mtune},
those options take precedence over the appropriate part of this option.

Permissible names for this option are the same as those for
@option{-mtune}.

@option{-mcpu=generic-@var{arch}} is also permissible, and is
equivalent to @option{-march=@var{arch} -mtune=generic-@var{arch}}.
See @option{-mtune} for more information.

@option{-mcpu=native} causes the compiler to auto-detect the CPU
of the build computer.  At present, this feature is only supported on
GNU/Linux, and not all architectures are recognized.  If the auto-detect
is unsuccessful the option has no effect.

@item -mfpu=@var{name}
@opindex mfpu
This specifies what floating-point hardware (or hardware emulation) is
available on the target.  Permissible names are: @samp{vfp}, @samp{vfpv3},
@samp{vfpv3-fp16}, @samp{vfpv3-d16}, @samp{vfpv3-d16-fp16}, @samp{vfpv3xd},
@samp{vfpv3xd-fp16}, @samp{neon}, @samp{neon-fp16}, @samp{vfpv4},
@samp{vfpv4-d16}, @samp{fpv4-sp-d16}, @samp{neon-vfpv4},
@samp{fpv5-d16}, @samp{fpv5-sp-d16},
@samp{fp-armv8}, @samp{neon-fp-armv8}, and @samp{crypto-neon-fp-armv8}.

If @option{-msoft-float} is specified this specifies the format of
floating-point values.

If the selected floating-point hardware includes the NEON extension
(e.g. @option{-mfpu}=@samp{neon}), note that floating-point
operations are not generated by LLVM's auto-vectorization pass unless
@option{-funsafe-math-optimizations} is also specified.  This is
because NEON hardware does not fully implement the IEEE 754 standard for
floating-point arithmetic (in particular denormal values are treated as
zero), so the use of NEON instructions may lead to a loss of precision.

@item -mfp16-format=@var{name}
@opindex mfp16-format
Specify the format of the @code{__fp16} half-precision floating-point type.
Permissible names are @samp{none}, @samp{ieee}, and @samp{alternative};
the default is @samp{none}, in which case the @code{__fp16} type is not
defined.  @xref{Half-Precision}, for more information.

@item -mstructure-size-boundary=@var{n}
@opindex mstructure-size-boundary
The sizes of all structures and unions are rounded up to a multiple
of the number of bits set by this option.  Permissible values are 8, 32
and 64.  The default value varies for different toolchains.  For the COFF
targeted toolchain the default value is 8.  A value of 64 is only allowed
if the underlying ABI supports it.

Specifying a larger number can produce faster, more efficient code, but
can also increase the size of the program.  Different values are potentially
incompatible.  Code compiled with one value cannot necessarily expect to
work with code or libraries compiled with another value, if they exchange
information using structures or unions.

@item -mabort-on-noreturn
@opindex mabort-on-noreturn
Generate a call to the function @code{abort} at the end of a
@code{noreturn} function.  It is executed if the function tries to
return.

@item -mlong-calls
@itemx -mno-long-calls
@opindex mlong-calls
@opindex mno-long-calls
Tells the compiler to perform function calls by first loading the
address of the function into a register and then performing a subroutine
call on this register.  This switch is needed if the target function
lies outside of the 64-megabyte addressing range of the offset-based
version of subroutine call instruction.

Even if this switch is enabled, not all function calls are turned
into long calls.  The heuristic is that static functions, functions
that have the @code{short_call} attribute, functions that are inside
the scope of a @code{#pragma no_long_calls} directive, and functions whose
definitions have already been compiled within the current compilation
unit are not turned into long calls.  The exceptions to this rule are
that weak function definitions, functions with the @code{long_call}
attribute or the @code{section} attribute, and functions that are within
the scope of a @code{#pragma long_calls} directive are always
turned into long calls.

This feature is not enabled by default.  Specifying
@option{-mno-long-calls} restores the default behavior, as does
placing the function calls within the scope of a @code{#pragma
long_calls_off} directive.  Note these switches have no effect on how
the compiler generates code to handle function calls via function
pointers.

@item -msingle-pic-base
@opindex msingle-pic-base
Treat the register used for PIC addressing as read-only, rather than
loading it in the prologue for each function.  The runtime system is
responsible for initializing this register with an appropriate value
before execution begins.

@item -mpic-register=@var{reg}
@opindex mpic-register
Specify the register to be used for PIC addressing.
For standard PIC base case, the default is any suitable register
determined by compiler.  For single PIC base case, the default is
@samp{R9} if target is EABI based or stack-checking is enabled,
otherwise the default is @samp{R10}.

@item -mpic-data-is-text-relative
@opindex mpic-data-is-text-relative
Assume that each data segments are relative to text segment at load time.
Therefore, it permits addressing data using PC-relative operations.
This option is on by default for targets other than VxWorks RTP.

@item -mpoke-function-name
@opindex mpoke-function-name
Write the name of each function into the text section, directly
preceding the function prologue.  The generated code is similar to this:

@smallexample
     t0
         .ascii "arm_poke_function_name", 0
         .align
     t1
         .word 0xff000000 + (t1 - t0)
     arm_poke_function_name
         mov     ip, sp
         stmfd   sp!, @{fp, ip, lr, pc@}
         sub     fp, ip, #4
@end smallexample

When performing a stack backtrace, code can inspect the value of
@code{pc} stored at @code{fp + 0}.  If the trace function then looks at
location @code{pc - 12} and the top 8 bits are set, then we know that
there is a function name embedded immediately preceding this location
and has length @code{((pc[-3]) & 0xff000000)}.

@item -mthumb
@itemx -marm
@opindex marm
@opindex mthumb

Select between generating code that executes in ARM and Thumb
states.  The default for most configurations is to generate code
that executes in ARM state, but the default can be changed by
configuring LLVM with the @option{--with-mode=}@var{state}
configure option.

@item -mtpcs-frame
@opindex mtpcs-frame
Generate a stack frame that is compliant with the Thumb Procedure Call
Standard for all non-leaf functions.  (A leaf function is one that does
not call any other functions.)  The default is @option{-mno-tpcs-frame}.

@item -mtpcs-leaf-frame
@opindex mtpcs-leaf-frame
Generate a stack frame that is compliant with the Thumb Procedure Call
Standard for all leaf functions.  (A leaf function is one that does
not call any other functions.)  The default is @option{-mno-apcs-leaf-frame}.

@item -mcallee-super-interworking
@opindex mcallee-super-interworking
Gives all externally visible functions in the file being compiled an ARM
instruction set header which switches to Thumb mode before executing the
rest of the function.  This allows these functions to be called from
non-interworking code.  This option is not valid in AAPCS configurations
because interworking is enabled by default.

@item -mcaller-super-interworking
@opindex mcaller-super-interworking
Allows calls via function pointers (including virtual functions) to
execute correctly regardless of whether the target code has been
compiled for interworking or not.  There is a small overhead in the cost
of executing a function pointer if this option is enabled.  This option
is not valid in AAPCS configurations because interworking is enabled
by default.

@item -mtp=@var{name}
@opindex mtp
Specify the access model for the thread local storage pointer.  The valid
models are @samp{soft}, which generates calls to @code{__aeabi_read_tp},
@samp{cp15}, which fetches the thread pointer from @code{cp15} directly
(supported in the arm6k architecture), and @samp{auto}, which uses the
best available method for the selected processor.  The default setting is
@samp{auto}.

@item -mtls-dialect=@var{dialect}
@opindex mtls-dialect
Specify the dialect to use for accessing thread local storage.  Two
@var{dialect}s are supported---@samp{gnu} and @samp{gnu2}.  The
@samp{gnu} dialect selects the original GNU scheme for supporting
local and global dynamic TLS models.  The @samp{gnu2} dialect
selects the GNU descriptor scheme, which provides better performance
for shared libraries.  The GNU descriptor scheme is compatible with
the original scheme, but does require new assembler, linker and
library support.  Initial and local exec TLS models are unaffected by
this option and always use the original scheme.

@item -mword-relocations
@opindex mword-relocations
Only generate absolute relocations on word-sized values (i.e. R_ARM_ABS32).
This is enabled by default on targets (uClinux, SymbianOS) where the runtime
loader imposes this restriction, and when @option{-fpic} or @option{-fPIC}
is specified.

@item -mfix-cortex-m3-ldrd
@opindex mfix-cortex-m3-ldrd
Some Cortex-M3 cores can cause data corruption when @code{ldrd} instructions
with overlapping destination and base registers are used.  This option avoids
generating these instructions.  This option is enabled by default when
@option{-mcpu=cortex-m3} is specified.

@item -munaligned-access
@itemx -mno-unaligned-access
@opindex munaligned-access
@opindex mno-unaligned-access
Enables (or disables) reading and writing of 16- and 32- bit values
from addresses that are not 16- or 32- bit aligned.  By default
unaligned access is disabled for all pre-ARMv6 and all ARMv6-M
architectures, and enabled for all other architectures.  If unaligned
access is not enabled then words in packed data structures are
accessed a byte at a time.

The ARM attribute @code{Tag_CPU_unaligned_access} is set in the
generated object file to either true or false, depending upon the
setting of this option.  If unaligned access is enabled then the
preprocessor symbol @code{__ARM_FEATURE_UNALIGNED} is also
defined.

@item -mneon-for-64bits
@opindex mneon-for-64bits
Enables using Neon to handle scalar 64-bits operations. This is
disabled by default since the cost of moving data from core registers
to Neon is high.

@item -mslow-flash-data
@opindex mslow-flash-data
Assume loading data from flash is slower than fetching instruction.
Therefore literal load is minimized for better performance.
This option is only supported when compiling for ARMv7 M-profile and
off by default.

@item -masm-syntax-unified
@opindex masm-syntax-unified
Assume inline assembler is using unified asm syntax.  The default is
currently off which implies divided syntax.  Currently this option is
available only for Thumb1 and has no effect on ARM state and Thumb2.
However, this may change in future releases of LLVM.  Divided syntax
should be considered deprecated.

@item -mrestrict-it
@opindex mrestrict-it
Restricts generation of IT blocks to conform to the rules of ARMv8.
IT blocks can only contain a single 16-bit instruction from a select
set of instructions. This option is on by default for ARMv8 Thumb mode.
@end table

@node Darwin Options
@subsection Darwin Options
@cindex Darwin options

These options are defined for all architectures running the Darwin operating
system.

FSF LLVM on Darwin does not create ``fat'' object files; it creates
an object file for the single architecture that LLVM was built to
target.  Apple's LLVM on Darwin does create ``fat'' files if multiple
@option{-arch} options are used; it does so by running the compiler or
linker multiple times and joining the results together with
@file{lipo}.

The subtype of the file created (like @samp{ppc7400} or @samp{ppc970} or
@samp{i686}) is determined by the flags that specify the ISA
that LLVM is targeting, like @option{-mcpu} or @option{-march}.  The
@option{-force_cpusubtype_ALL} option can be used to override this.

The Darwin tools vary in their behavior when presented with an ISA
mismatch.  The assembler, @file{as}, only permits instructions to
be used that are valid for the subtype of the file it is generating,
so you cannot put 64-bit instructions in a @samp{ppc750} object file.
The linker for shared libraries, @file{/usr/bin/libtool}, fails
and prints an error if asked to create a shared library with a less
restrictive subtype than its input files (for instance, trying to put
a @samp{ppc970} object file in a @samp{ppc7400} library).  The linker
for executables, @command{ld}, quietly gives the executable the most
restrictive subtype of any of its input files.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -F@var{dir}
@opindex F
Add the framework directory @var{dir} to the head of the list of
directories to be searched for header files.  These directories are
interleaved with those specified by @option{-I} options and are
scanned in a left-to-right order.

A framework directory is a directory with frameworks in it.  A
framework is a directory with a @file{Headers} and/or
@file{PrivateHeaders} directory contained directly in it that ends
in @file{.framework}.  The name of a framework is the name of this
directory excluding the @file{.framework}.  Headers associated with
the framework are found in one of those two directories, with
@file{Headers} being searched first.  A subframework is a framework
directory that is in a framework's @file{Frameworks} directory.
Includes of subframework headers can only appear in a header of a
framework that contains the subframework, or in a sibling subframework
header.  Two subframeworks are siblings if they occur in the same
framework.  A subframework should not have the same name as a
framework; a warning is issued if this is violated.  Currently a
subframework cannot have subframeworks; in the future, the mechanism
may be extended to support this.  The standard frameworks can be found
in @file{/System/Library/Frameworks} and
@file{/Library/Frameworks}.  An example include looks like
@code{#include <Framework/header.h>}, where @file{Framework} denotes
the name of the framework and @file{header.h} is found in the
@file{PrivateHeaders} or @file{Headers} directory.

@item -iframework@var{dir}
@opindex iframework
Like @option{-F} except the directory is a treated as a system
directory.  The main difference between this @option{-iframework} and
@option{-F} is that with @option{-iframework} the compiler does not
warn about constructs contained within header files found via
@var{dir}.  This option is valid only for the C family of languages.

@item -gused
@opindex gused
Emit debugging information for symbols that are used.  For stabs
debugging format, this enables @option{-feliminate-unused-debug-symbols}.
This is by default ON@.

@item -gfull
@opindex gfull
Emit debugging information for all symbols and types.

@item -mmacosx-version-min=@var{version}
The earliest version of MacOS X that this executable will run on
is @var{version}.  Typical values of @var{version} include @code{10.1},
@code{10.2}, and @code{10.3.9}.

If the compiler was built to use the system's headers by default,
then the default for this option is the system version on which the
compiler is running, otherwise the default is to make choices that
are compatible with as many systems and code bases as possible.

@item -mkernel
@opindex mkernel
Enable kernel development mode.  The @option{-mkernel} option sets
@option{-static}, @option{-fno-common}, @option{-fno-use-cxa-atexit},
@option{-fno-exceptions}, @option{-fno-non-call-exceptions},
@option{-fapple-kext}, @option{-fno-weak} and @option{-fno-rtti} where
applicable.  This mode also sets @option{-mno-altivec},
@option{-msoft-float}, @option{-fno-builtin} and
@option{-mlong-branch} for PowerPC targets.

@item -mone-byte-bool
@opindex mone-byte-bool
Override the defaults for @code{bool} so that @code{sizeof(bool)==1}.
By default @code{sizeof(bool)} is @code{4} when compiling for
Darwin/PowerPC and @code{1} when compiling for Darwin/x86, so this
option has no effect on x86.

@strong{Warning:} The @option{-mone-byte-bool} switch causes LLVM
to generate code that is not binary compatible with code generated
without that switch.  Using this switch may require recompiling all
other modules in a program, including system libraries.  Use this
switch to conform to a non-default data model.

@item -mfix-and-continue
@itemx -ffix-and-continue
@itemx -findirect-data
@opindex mfix-and-continue
@opindex ffix-and-continue
@opindex findirect-data
Generate code suitable for fast turnaround development, such as to
allow GDB to dynamically load @file{.o} files into already-running
programs.  @option{-findirect-data} and @option{-ffix-and-continue}
are provided for backwards compatibility.

@item -all_load
@opindex all_load
Loads all members of static archive libraries.
See man ld(1) for more information.

@item -arch_errors_fatal
@opindex arch_errors_fatal
Cause the errors having to do with files that have the wrong architecture
to be fatal.

@item -bind_at_load
@opindex bind_at_load
Causes the output file to be marked such that the dynamic linker will
bind all undefined references when the file is loaded or launched.

@item -bundle
@opindex bundle
Produce a Mach-o bundle format file.
See man ld(1) for more information.

@item -bundle_loader @var{executable}
@opindex bundle_loader
This option specifies the @var{executable} that will load the build
output file being linked.  See man ld(1) for more information.

@item -dynamiclib
@opindex dynamiclib
When passed this option, LLVM produces a dynamic library instead of
an executable when linking, using the Darwin @file{libtool} command.

@item -force_cpusubtype_ALL
@opindex force_cpusubtype_ALL
This causes LLVM's output file to have the @samp{ALL} subtype, instead of
one controlled by the @option{-mcpu} or @option{-march} option.

@item -allowable_client  @var{client_name}
@itemx -client_name
@itemx -compatibility_version
@itemx -current_version
@itemx -dead_strip
@itemx -dependency-file
@itemx -dylib_file
@itemx -dylinker_install_name
@itemx -dynamic
@itemx -exported_symbols_list
@itemx -filelist
@need 800
@itemx -flat_namespace
@itemx -force_flat_namespace
@itemx -headerpad_max_install_names
@itemx -image_base
@itemx -init
@itemx -install_name
@itemx -keep_private_externs
@itemx -multi_module
@itemx -multiply_defined
@itemx -multiply_defined_unused
@need 800
@itemx -noall_load
@itemx -no_dead_strip_inits_and_terms
@itemx -nofixprebinding
@itemx -nomultidefs
@itemx -noprebind
@itemx -noseglinkedit
@itemx -pagezero_size
@itemx -prebind
@itemx -prebind_all_twolevel_modules
@itemx -private_bundle
@need 800
@itemx -read_only_relocs
@itemx -sectalign
@itemx -sectobjectsymbols
@itemx -whyload
@itemx -seg1addr
@itemx -sectcreate
@itemx -sectobjectsymbols
@itemx -sectorder
@itemx -segaddr
@itemx -segs_read_only_addr
@need 800
@itemx -segs_read_write_addr
@itemx -seg_addr_table
@itemx -seg_addr_table_filename
@itemx -seglinkedit
@itemx -segprot
@itemx -segs_read_only_addr
@itemx -segs_read_write_addr
@itemx -single_module
@itemx -static
@itemx -sub_library
@need 800
@itemx -sub_umbrella
@itemx -twolevel_namespace
@itemx -umbrella
@itemx -undefined
@itemx -unexported_symbols_list
@itemx -weak_reference_mismatches
@itemx -whatsloaded
@opindex allowable_client
@opindex client_name
@opindex compatibility_version
@opindex current_version
@opindex dead_strip
@opindex dependency-file
@opindex dylib_file
@opindex dylinker_install_name
@opindex dynamic
@opindex exported_symbols_list
@opindex filelist
@opindex flat_namespace
@opindex force_flat_namespace
@opindex headerpad_max_install_names
@opindex image_base
@opindex init
@opindex install_name
@opindex keep_private_externs
@opindex multi_module
@opindex multiply_defined
@opindex multiply_defined_unused
@opindex noall_load
@opindex no_dead_strip_inits_and_terms
@opindex nofixprebinding
@opindex nomultidefs
@opindex noprebind
@opindex noseglinkedit
@opindex pagezero_size
@opindex prebind
@opindex prebind_all_twolevel_modules
@opindex private_bundle
@opindex read_only_relocs
@opindex sectalign
@opindex sectobjectsymbols
@opindex whyload
@opindex seg1addr
@opindex sectcreate
@opindex sectobjectsymbols
@opindex sectorder
@opindex segaddr
@opindex segs_read_only_addr
@opindex segs_read_write_addr
@opindex seg_addr_table
@opindex seg_addr_table_filename
@opindex seglinkedit
@opindex segprot
@opindex segs_read_only_addr
@opindex segs_read_write_addr
@opindex single_module
@opindex static
@opindex sub_library
@opindex sub_umbrella
@opindex twolevel_namespace
@opindex umbrella
@opindex undefined
@opindex unexported_symbols_list
@opindex weak_reference_mismatches
@opindex whatsloaded
These options are passed to the Darwin linker.  The Darwin linker man page
describes them in detail.
@end table

@node Hexagon Options
@subsection Hexagon Options

These @samp{-m} options are defined for Qualcomm@registeredsymbol{}
Hexagon targets:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -mieee-rnd-near
@opindex mieee-rnd-near
Use IEEE 745 floating point rounding to nearest.  The documentation in
the source code does not indicate which version of round to nearest is
used, but the default woud be ties to even.

@item -mv1
@itemx -mv2
@itemx -mv3
@itemx -mv4
@itemx -mv5
@opindex mv1
@opindex mv2
@opindex mv3
@opindex mv4
@opindex mv5
Support the indicated version of the Hexagon architecture.

@end table

@node GNU/Linux Options
@subsection GNU/Linux Options

These @samp{-m} options are defined for GNU/Linux targets:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -mglibc
@opindex mglibc
Use the GNU C library.  This is the default except
on @samp{*-*-linux-*uclibc*} and @samp{*-*-linux-*android*} targets.

@item -muclibc
@opindex muclibc
Use uClibc C library.  This is the default on
@samp{*-*-linux-*uclibc*} targets.

@item -mbionic
@opindex mbionic
Use Bionic C library.  This is the default on
@samp{*-*-linux-*android*} targets.

@item -mandroid
@opindex mandroid
Compile code compatible with Android platform.  This is the default on
@samp{*-*-linux-*android*} targets.

When compiling, this option enables @option{-mbionic}, @option{-fPIC},
@option{-fno-exceptions} and @option{-fno-rtti} by default.  When linking,
this option makes the LLVM driver pass Android-specific options to the linker.
Finally, this option causes the preprocessor macro @code{__ANDROID__}
to be defined.

@item -tno-android-cc
@opindex tno-android-cc
Disable compilation effects of @option{-mandroid}, i.e., do not enable
@option{-mbionic}, @option{-fPIC}, @option{-fno-exceptions} and
@option{-fno-rtti} by default.

@item -tno-android-ld
@opindex tno-android-ld
Disable linking effects of @option{-mandroid}, i.e., pass standard Linux
linking options to the linker.

@end table

@node MIPS Options
@subsection MIPS Options
@cindex MIPS options

@table @gcctabopt

@item -EB
@opindex EB
Generate big-endian code.

@item -EL
@opindex EL
Generate little-endian code.  This is the default for @samp{mips*el-*-*}
configurations.

@item -march=@var{arch}
@opindex march
Generate code that runs on @var{arch}, which can be the name of a
generic MIPS ISA, or the name of a particular processor.
The ISA names are:
@samp{mips1}, @samp{mips2}, @samp{mips3}, @samp{mips4},
@samp{mips32}, @samp{mips32r2}, @samp{mips32r3}, @samp{mips32r5},
@samp{mips32r6}, @samp{mips64}, @samp{mips64r2}, @samp{mips64r3},
@samp{mips64r5} and @samp{mips64r6}.
The processor names are:
@samp{4kc}, @samp{4km}, @samp{4kp}, @samp{4ksc},
@samp{4kec}, @samp{4kem}, @samp{4kep}, @samp{4ksd},
@samp{5kc}, @samp{5kf},
@samp{20kc},
@samp{24kc}, @samp{24kf2_1}, @samp{24kf1_1},
@samp{24kec}, @samp{24kef2_1}, @samp{24kef1_1},
@samp{34kc}, @samp{34kf2_1}, @samp{34kf1_1}, @samp{34kn},
@samp{74kc}, @samp{74kf2_1}, @samp{74kf1_1}, @samp{74kf3_2},
@samp{1004kc}, @samp{1004kf2_1}, @samp{1004kf1_1},
@samp{loongson2e}, @samp{loongson2f}, @samp{loongson3a},
@samp{m4k},
@samp{m14k}, @samp{m14kc}, @samp{m14ke}, @samp{m14kec},
@samp{octeon}, @samp{octeon+}, @samp{octeon2}, @samp{octeon3},
@samp{orion},
@samp{p5600},
@samp{r2000}, @samp{r3000}, @samp{r3900}, @samp{r4000}, @samp{r4400},
@samp{r4600}, @samp{r4650}, @samp{r4700}, @samp{r6000}, @samp{r8000},
@samp{rm7000}, @samp{rm9000},
@samp{r10000}, @samp{r12000}, @samp{r14000}, @samp{r16000},
@samp{sb1},
@samp{sr71000},
@samp{vr4100}, @samp{vr4111}, @samp{vr4120}, @samp{vr4130}, @samp{vr4300},
@samp{vr5000}, @samp{vr5400}, @samp{vr5500},
@samp{xlr} and @samp{xlp}.
The special value @samp{from-abi} selects the
most compatible architecture for the selected ABI (that is,
@samp{mips1} for 32-bit ABIs and @samp{mips3} for 64-bit ABIs)@.

The native Linux/GNU toolchain also supports the value @samp{native},
which selects the best architecture option for the host processor.
@option{-march=native} has no effect if LLVM does not recognize
the processor.

In processor names, a final @samp{000} can be abbreviated as @samp{k}
(for example, @option{-march=r2k}).  Prefixes are optional, and
@samp{vr} may be written @samp{r}.

Names of the form @samp{@var{n}f2_1} refer to processors with
FPUs clocked at half the rate of the core, names of the form
@samp{@var{n}f1_1} refer to processors with FPUs clocked at the same
rate as the core, and names of the form @samp{@var{n}f3_2} refer to
processors with FPUs clocked a ratio of 3:2 with respect to the core.
For compatibility reasons, @samp{@var{n}f} is accepted as a synonym
for @samp{@var{n}f2_1} while @samp{@var{n}x} and @samp{@var{b}fx} are
accepted as synonyms for @samp{@var{n}f1_1}.

LLVM defines two macros based on the value of this option.  The first
is @code{_MIPS_ARCH}, which gives the name of target architecture, as
a string.  The second has the form @code{_MIPS_ARCH_@var{foo}},
where @var{foo} is the capitalized value of @code{_MIPS_ARCH}@.
For example, @option{-march=r2000} sets @code{_MIPS_ARCH}
to @code{"r2000"} and defines the macro @code{_MIPS_ARCH_R2000}.

Note that the @code{_MIPS_ARCH} macro uses the processor names given
above.  In other words, it has the full prefix and does not
abbreviate @samp{000} as @samp{k}.  In the case of @samp{from-abi},
the macro names the resolved architecture (either @code{"mips1"} or
@code{"mips3"}).  It names the default architecture when no
@option{-march} option is given.

@item -mtune=@var{arch}
@opindex mtune
Optimize for @var{arch}.  Among other things, this option controls
the way instructions are scheduled, and the perceived cost of arithmetic
operations.  The list of @var{arch} values is the same as for
@option{-march}.

When this option is not used, LLVM optimizes for the processor
specified by @option{-march}.  By using @option{-march} and
@option{-mtune} together, it is possible to generate code that
runs on a family of processors, but optimize the code for one
particular member of that family.

@option{-mtune} defines the macros @code{_MIPS_TUNE} and
@code{_MIPS_TUNE_@var{foo}}, which work in the same way as the
@option{-march} ones described above.

@item -mips1
@opindex mips1
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips1}.

@item -mips2
@opindex mips2
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips2}.

@item -mips3
@opindex mips3
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips3}.

@item -mips4
@opindex mips4
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips4}.

@item -mips32
@opindex mips32
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips32}.

@item -mips32r3
@opindex mips32r3
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips32r3}.

@item -mips32r5
@opindex mips32r5
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips32r5}.

@item -mips32r6
@opindex mips32r6
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips32r6}.

@item -mips64
@opindex mips64
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips64}.

@item -mips64r2
@opindex mips64r2
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips64r2}.

@item -mips64r3
@opindex mips64r3
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips64r3}.

@item -mips64r5
@opindex mips64r5
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips64r5}.

@item -mips64r6
@opindex mips64r6
Equivalent to @option{-march=mips64r6}.

@item -mips16
@itemx -mno-mips16
@opindex mips16
@opindex mno-mips16
Generate (do not generate) MIPS16 code.  If LLVM is targeting a
MIPS32 or MIPS64 architecture, it makes use of the MIPS16e ASE@.

MIPS16 code generation can also be controlled on a per-function basis
by means of @code{mips16} and @code{nomips16} attributes.
@xref{Function Attributes}, for more information.

@item -mflip-mips16
@opindex mflip-mips16
Generate MIPS16 code on alternating functions.  This option is provided
for regression testing of mixed MIPS16/non-MIPS16 code generation, and is
not intended for ordinary use in compiling user code.

@item -minterlink-compressed
@item -mno-interlink-compressed
@opindex minterlink-compressed
@opindex mno-interlink-compressed
Require (do not require) that code using the standard (uncompressed) MIPS ISA
be link-compatible with MIPS16 and microMIPS code, and vice versa.

For example, code using the standard ISA encoding cannot jump directly
to MIPS16 or microMIPS code; it must either use a call or an indirect jump.
@option{-minterlink-compressed} therefore disables direct jumps unless LLVM
knows that the target of the jump is not compressed.

@item -minterlink-mips16
@itemx -mno-interlink-mips16
@opindex minterlink-mips16
@opindex mno-interlink-mips16
Aliases of @option{-minterlink-compressed} and
@option{-mno-interlink-compressed}.  These options predate the microMIPS ASE
and are retained for backwards compatibility.

@item -mabi=32
@itemx -mabi=o64
@itemx -mabi=n32
@itemx -mabi=64
@itemx -mabi=eabi
@opindex mabi=32
@opindex mabi=o64
@opindex mabi=n32
@opindex mabi=64
@opindex mabi=eabi
Generate code for the given ABI@.

Note that the EABI has a 32-bit and a 64-bit variant.  LLVM normally
generates 64-bit code when you select a 64-bit architecture, but you
can use @option{-mgp32} to get 32-bit code instead.

For information about the O64 ABI, see
@uref{http://gcc.gnu.org/@/projects/@/mipso64-abi.html}.

LLVM supports a variant of the o32 ABI in which floating-point registers
are 64 rather than 32 bits wide.  You can select this combination with
@option{-mabi=32} @option{-mfp64}.  This ABI relies on the @code{mthc1}
and @code{mfhc1} instructions and is therefore only supported for
MIPS32R2, MIPS32R3 and MIPS32R5 processors.

The register assignments for arguments and return values remain the
same, but each scalar value is passed in a single 64-bit register
rather than a pair of 32-bit registers.  For example, scalar
floating-point values are returned in @samp{$f0} only, not a
@samp{$f0}/@samp{$f1} pair.  The set of call-saved registers also
remains the same in that the even-numbered double-precision registers
are saved.

Two additional variants of the o32 ABI are supported to enable
a transition from 32-bit to 64-bit registers.  These are FPXX
(@option{-mfpxx}) and FP64A (@option{-mfp64} @option{-mno-odd-spreg}).
The FPXX extension mandates that all code must execute correctly
when run using 32-bit or 64-bit registers.  The code can be interlinked
with either FP32 or FP64, but not both.
The FP64A extension is similar to the FP64 extension but forbids the
use of odd-numbered single-precision registers.  This can be used
in conjunction with the @code{FRE} mode of FPUs in MIPS32R5
processors and allows both FP32 and FP64A code to interlink and
run in the same process without changing FPU modes.

@item -mabicalls
@itemx -mno-abicalls
@opindex mabicalls
@opindex mno-abicalls
Generate (do not generate) code that is suitable for SVR4-style
dynamic objects.  @option{-mabicalls} is the default for SVR4-based
systems.

@item -mshared
@itemx -mno-shared
Generate (do not generate) code that is fully position-independent,
and that can therefore be linked into shared libraries.  This option
only affects @option{-mabicalls}.

All @option{-mabicalls} code has traditionally been position-independent,
regardless of options like @option{-fPIC} and @option{-fpic}.  However,
as an extension, the GNU toolchain allows executables to use absolute
accesses for locally-binding symbols.  It can also use shorter GP
initialization sequences and generate direct calls to locally-defined
functions.  This mode is selected by @option{-mno-shared}.

@option{-mno-shared} depends on binutils 2.16 or higher and generates
objects that can only be linked by the GNU linker.  However, the option
does not affect the ABI of the final executable; it only affects the ABI
of relocatable objects.  Using @option{-mno-shared} generally makes
executables both smaller and quicker.

@option{-mshared} is the default.

@item -mplt
@itemx -mno-plt
@opindex mplt
@opindex mno-plt
Assume (do not assume) that the static and dynamic linkers
support PLTs and copy relocations.  This option only affects
@option{-mno-shared -mabicalls}.  For the n64 ABI, this option
has no effect without @option{-msym32}.

You can make @option{-mplt} the default by configuring
LLVM with @option{--with-mips-plt}.  The default is
@option{-mno-plt} otherwise.

@item -mxgot
@itemx -mno-xgot
@opindex mxgot
@opindex mno-xgot
Lift (do not lift) the usual restrictions on the size of the global
offset table.

LLVM normally uses a single instruction to load values from the GOT@.
While this is relatively efficient, it only works if the GOT
is smaller than about 64k.  Anything larger causes the linker
to report an error such as:

@cindex relocation truncated to fit (MIPS)
@smallexample
relocation truncated to fit: R_MIPS_GOT16 foobar
@end smallexample

If this happens, you should recompile your code with @option{-mxgot}.
This works with very large GOTs, although the code is also
less efficient, since it takes three instructions to fetch the
value of a global symbol.

Note that some linkers can create multiple GOTs.  If you have such a
linker, you should only need to use @option{-mxgot} when a single object
file accesses more than 64k's worth of GOT entries.  Very few do.

These options have no effect unless LLVM is generating position
independent code.

@item -mgp32
@opindex mgp32
Assume that general-purpose registers are 32 bits wide.

@item -mgp64
@opindex mgp64
Assume that general-purpose registers are 64 bits wide.

@item -mfp32
@opindex mfp32
Assume that floating-point registers are 32 bits wide.

@item -mfp64
@opindex mfp64
Assume that floating-point registers are 64 bits wide.

@item -mfpxx
@opindex mfpxx
Do not assume the width of floating-point registers.

@item -mhard-float
@opindex mhard-float
Use floating-point coprocessor instructions.

@item -msoft-float
@opindex msoft-float
Do not use floating-point coprocessor instructions.  Implement
floating-point calculations using library calls instead.

@item -mno-float
@opindex mno-float
Equivalent to @option{-msoft-float}, but additionally asserts that the
program being compiled does not perform any floating-point operations.
This option is presently supported only by some bare-metal MIPS
configurations, where it may select a special set of libraries
that lack all floating-point support (including, for example, the
floating-point @code{printf} formats).
If code compiled with @option{-mno-float} accidentally contains
floating-point operations, it is likely to suffer a link-time
or run-time failure.

@item -msingle-float
@opindex msingle-float
Assume that the floating-point coprocessor only supports single-precision
operations.

@item -mdouble-float
@opindex mdouble-float
Assume that the floating-point coprocessor supports double-precision
operations.  This is the default.

@item -modd-spreg
@itemx -mno-odd-spreg
@opindex modd-spreg
@opindex mno-odd-spreg
Enable the use of odd-numbered single-precision floating-point registers
for the o32 ABI.  This is the default for processors that are known to
support these registers.  When using the o32 FPXX ABI, @option{-mno-odd-spreg}
is set by default.

@item -mabs=2008
@itemx -mabs=legacy
@opindex mabs=2008
@opindex mabs=legacy
These options control the treatment of the special not-a-number (NaN)
IEEE 754 floating-point data with the @code{abs.@i{fmt}} and
@code{neg.@i{fmt}} machine instructions.

By default or when the @option{-mabs=legacy} is used the legacy
treatment is selected.  In this case these instructions are considered
arithmetic and avoided where correct operation is required and the
input operand might be a NaN.  A longer sequence of instructions that
manipulate the sign bit of floating-point datum manually is used
instead unless the @option{-ffinite-math-only} option has also been
specified.

The @option{-mabs=2008} option selects the IEEE 754-2008 treatment.  In
this case these instructions are considered non-arithmetic and therefore
operating correctly in all cases, including in particular where the
input operand is a NaN.  These instructions are therefore always used
for the respective operations.

@item -mnan=2008
@itemx -mnan=legacy
@opindex mnan=2008
@opindex mnan=legacy
These options control the encoding of the special not-a-number (NaN)
IEEE 754 floating-point data.

The @option{-mnan=legacy} option selects the legacy encoding.  In this
case quiet NaNs (qNaNs) are denoted by the first bit of their trailing
significand field being 0, whereas signalling NaNs (sNaNs) are denoted
by the first bit of their trailing significand field being 1.

The @option{-mnan=2008} option selects the IEEE 754-2008 encoding.  In
this case qNaNs are denoted by the first bit of their trailing
significand field being 1, whereas sNaNs are denoted by the first bit of
their trailing significand field being 0.

The default is @option{-mnan=legacy} unless LLVM has been configured with
@option{--with-nan=2008}.

@item -mllsc
@itemx -mno-llsc
@opindex mllsc
@opindex mno-llsc
Use (do not use) @samp{ll}, @samp{sc}, and @samp{sync} instructions to
implement atomic memory built-in functions.  When neither option is
specified, LLVM uses the instructions if the target architecture
supports them.

@option{-mllsc} is useful if the runtime environment can emulate the
instructions and @option{-mno-llsc} can be useful when compiling for
nonstandard ISAs.  You can make either option the default by
configuring LLVM with @option{--with-llsc} and @option{--without-llsc}
respectively.  @option{--with-llsc} is the default for some
configurations; see the installation documentation for details.

@item -mdsp
@itemx -mno-dsp
@opindex mdsp
@opindex mno-dsp
Use (do not use) revision 1 of the MIPS DSP ASE@.
@xref{MIPS DSP Built-in Functions}.  This option defines the
preprocessor macro @code{__mips_dsp}.  It also defines
@code{__mips_dsp_rev} to 1.

@item -mdspr2
@itemx -mno-dspr2
@opindex mdspr2
@opindex mno-dspr2
Use (do not use) revision 2 of the MIPS DSP ASE@.
@xref{MIPS DSP Built-in Functions}.  This option defines the
preprocessor macros @code{__mips_dsp} and @code{__mips_dspr2}.
It also defines @code{__mips_dsp_rev} to 2.

@item -msmartmips
@itemx -mno-smartmips
@opindex msmartmips
@opindex mno-smartmips
Use (do not use) the MIPS SmartMIPS ASE.

@item -mpaired-single
@itemx -mno-paired-single
@opindex mpaired-single
@opindex mno-paired-single
Use (do not use) paired-single floating-point instructions.
@xref{MIPS Paired-Single Support}.  This option requires
hardware floating-point support to be enabled.

@item -mdmx
@itemx -mno-mdmx
@opindex mdmx
@opindex mno-mdmx
Use (do not use) MIPS Digital Media Extension instructions.
This option can only be used when generating 64-bit code and requires
hardware floating-point support to be enabled.

@item -mips3d
@itemx -mno-mips3d
@opindex mips3d
@opindex mno-mips3d
Use (do not use) the MIPS-3D ASE@.  @xref{MIPS-3D Built-in Functions}.
The option @option{-mips3d} implies @option{-mpaired-single}.

@item -mmicromips
@itemx -mno-micromips
@opindex mmicromips
@opindex mno-mmicromips
Generate (do not generate) microMIPS code.

MicroMIPS code generation can also be controlled on a per-function basis
by means of @code{micromips} and @code{nomicromips} attributes.
@xref{Function Attributes}, for more information.

@item -mmt
@itemx -mno-mt
@opindex mmt
@opindex mno-mt
Use (do not use) MT Multithreading instructions.

@item -mmcu
@itemx -mno-mcu
@opindex mmcu
@opindex mno-mcu
Use (do not use) the MIPS MCU ASE instructions.

@item -meva
@itemx -mno-eva
@opindex meva
@opindex mno-eva
Use (do not use) the MIPS Enhanced Virtual Addressing instructions.

@item -mvirt
@itemx -mno-virt
@opindex mvirt
@opindex mno-virt
Use (do not use) the MIPS Virtualization Application Specific instructions.

@item -mxpa
@itemx -mno-xpa
@opindex mxpa
@opindex mno-xpa
Use (do not use) the MIPS eXtended Physical Address (XPA) instructions.

@item -mlong64
@opindex mlong64
Force @code{long} types to be 64 bits wide.  See @option{-mlong32} for
an explanation of the default and the way that the pointer size is
determined.

@item -mlong32
@opindex mlong32
Force @code{long}, @code{int}, and pointer types to be 32 bits wide.

The default size of @code{int}s, @code{long}s and pointers depends on
the ABI@.  All the supported ABIs use 32-bit @code{int}s.  The n64 ABI
uses 64-bit @code{long}s, as does the 64-bit EABI; the others use
32-bit @code{long}s.  Pointers are the same size as @code{long}s,
or the same size as integer registers, whichever is smaller.

@item -msym32
@itemx -mno-sym32
@opindex msym32
@opindex mno-sym32
Assume (do not assume) that all symbols have 32-bit values, regardless
of the selected ABI@.  This option is useful in combination with
@option{-mabi=64} and @option{-mno-abicalls} because it allows LLVM
to generate shorter and faster references to symbolic addresses.

@item -G @var{num}
@opindex G
Put definitions of externally-visible data in a small data section
if that data is no bigger than @var{num} bytes.  LLVM can then generate
more efficient accesses to the data; see @option{-mgpopt} for details.

The default @option{-G} option depends on the configuration.

@item -mlocal-sdata
@itemx -mno-local-sdata
@opindex mlocal-sdata
@opindex mno-local-sdata
Extend (do not extend) the @option{-G} behavior to local data too,
such as to static variables in C@.  @option{-mlocal-sdata} is the
default for all configurations.

If the linker complains that an application is using too much small data,
you might want to try rebuilding the less performance-critical parts with
@option{-mno-local-sdata}.  You might also want to build large
libraries with @option{-mno-local-sdata}, so that the libraries leave
more room for the main program.

@item -mextern-sdata
@itemx -mno-extern-sdata
@opindex mextern-sdata
@opindex mno-extern-sdata
Assume (do not assume) that externally-defined data is in
a small data section if the size of that data is within the @option{-G} limit.
@option{-mextern-sdata} is the default for all configurations.

If you compile a module @var{Mod} with @option{-mextern-sdata} @option{-G
@var{num}} @option{-mgpopt}, and @var{Mod} references a variable @var{Var}
that is no bigger than @var{num} bytes, you must make sure that @var{Var}
is placed in a small data section.  If @var{Var} is defined by another
module, you must either compile that module with a high-enough
@option{-G} setting or attach a @code{section} attribute to @var{Var}'s
definition.  If @var{Var} is common, you must link the application
with a high-enough @option{-G} setting.

The easiest way of satisfying these restrictions is to compile
and link every module with the same @option{-G} option.  However,
you may wish to build a library that supports several different
small data limits.  You can do this by compiling the library with
the highest supported @option{-G} setting and additionally using
@option{-mno-extern-sdata} to stop the library from making assumptions
about externally-defined data.

@item -mgpopt
@itemx -mno-gpopt
@opindex mgpopt
@opindex mno-gpopt
Use (do not use) GP-relative accesses for symbols that are known to be
in a small data section; see @option{-G}, @option{-mlocal-sdata} and
@option{-mextern-sdata}.  @option{-mgpopt} is the default for all
configurations.

@option{-mno-gpopt} is useful for cases where the @code{$gp} register
might not hold the value of @code{_gp}.  For example, if the code is
part of a library that might be used in a boot monitor, programs that
call boot monitor routines pass an unknown value in @code{$gp}.
(In such situations, the boot monitor itself is usually compiled
with @option{-G0}.)

@option{-mno-gpopt} implies @option{-mno-local-sdata} and
@option{-mno-extern-sdata}.

@item -membedded-data
@itemx -mno-embedded-data
@opindex membedded-data
@opindex mno-embedded-data
Allocate variables to the read-only data section first if possible, then
next in the small data section if possible, otherwise in data.  This gives
slightly slower code than the default, but reduces the amount of RAM required
when executing, and thus may be preferred for some embedded systems.

@item -muninit-const-in-rodata
@itemx -mno-uninit-const-in-rodata
@opindex muninit-const-in-rodata
@opindex mno-uninit-const-in-rodata
Put uninitialized @code{const} variables in the read-only data section.
This option is only meaningful in conjunction with @option{-membedded-data}.

@item -mcode-readable=@var{setting}
@opindex mcode-readable
Specify whether LLVM may generate code that reads from executable sections.
There are three possible settings:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -mcode-readable=yes
Instructions may freely access executable sections.  This is the
default setting.

@item -mcode-readable=pcrel
MIPS16 PC-relative load instructions can access executable sections,
but other instructions must not do so.  This option is useful on 4KSc
and 4KSd processors when the code TLBs have the Read Inhibit bit set.
It is also useful on processors that can be configured to have a dual
instruction/data SRAM interface and that, like the M4K, automatically
redirect PC-relative loads to the instruction RAM.

@item -mcode-readable=no
Instructions must not access executable sections.  This option can be
useful on targets that are configured to have a dual instruction/data
SRAM interface but that (unlike the M4K) do not automatically redirect
PC-relative loads to the instruction RAM.
@end table

@item -msplit-addresses
@itemx -mno-split-addresses
@opindex msplit-addresses
@opindex mno-split-addresses
Enable (disable) use of the @code{%hi()} and @code{%lo()} assembler
relocation operators.  This option has been superseded by
@option{-mexplicit-relocs} but is retained for backwards compatibility.

@item -mexplicit-relocs
@itemx -mno-explicit-relocs
@opindex mexplicit-relocs
@opindex mno-explicit-relocs
Use (do not use) assembler relocation operators when dealing with symbolic
addresses.  The alternative, selected by @option{-mno-explicit-relocs},
is to use assembler macros instead.

@option{-mexplicit-relocs} is the default if LLVM was configured
to use an assembler that supports relocation operators.

@item -mcheck-zero-division
@itemx -mno-check-zero-division
@opindex mcheck-zero-division
@opindex mno-check-zero-division
Trap (do not trap) on integer division by zero.

The default is @option{-mcheck-zero-division}.

@item -mdivide-traps
@itemx -mdivide-breaks
@opindex mdivide-traps
@opindex mdivide-breaks
MIPS systems check for division by zero by generating either a
conditional trap or a break instruction.  Using traps results in
smaller code, but is only supported on MIPS II and later.  Also, some
versions of the Linux kernel have a bug that prevents trap from
generating the proper signal (@code{SIGFPE}).  Use @option{-mdivide-traps} to
allow conditional traps on architectures that support them and
@option{-mdivide-breaks} to force the use of breaks.

The default is usually @option{-mdivide-traps}, but this can be
overridden at configure time using @option{--with-divide=breaks}.
Divide-by-zero checks can be completely disabled using
@option{-mno-check-zero-division}.

@item -mmemcpy
@itemx -mno-memcpy
@opindex mmemcpy
@opindex mno-memcpy
Force (do not force) the use of @code{memcpy} for non-trivial block
moves.  The default is @option{-mno-memcpy}, which allows LLVM to inline
most constant-sized copies.

@item -mlong-calls
@itemx -mno-long-calls
@opindex mlong-calls
@opindex mno-long-calls
Disable (do not disable) use of the @code{jal} instruction.  Calling
functions using @code{jal} is more efficient but requires the caller
and callee to be in the same 256 megabyte segment.

This option has no effect on abicalls code.  The default is
@option{-mno-long-calls}.

@item -mmad
@itemx -mno-mad
@opindex mmad
@opindex mno-mad
Enable (disable) use of the @code{mad}, @code{madu} and @code{mul}
instructions, as provided by the R4650 ISA@.

@item -mimadd
@itemx -mno-imadd
@opindex mimadd
@opindex mno-imadd
Enable (disable) use of the @code{madd} and @code{msub} integer
instructions.  The default is @option{-mimadd} on architectures
that support @code{madd} and @code{msub} except for the 74k
architecture where it was found to generate slower code.

@item -mfused-madd
@itemx -mno-fused-madd
@opindex mfused-madd
@opindex mno-fused-madd
Enable (disable) use of the floating-point multiply-accumulate
instructions, when they are available.  The default is
@option{-mfused-madd}.

On the R8000 CPU when multiply-accumulate instructions are used,
the intermediate product is calculated to infinite precision
and is not subject to the FCSR Flush to Zero bit.  This may be
undesirable in some circumstances.  On other processors the result
is numerically identical to the equivalent computation using
separate multiply, add, subtract and negate instructions.

@item -nocpp
@opindex nocpp
Tell the MIPS assembler to not run its preprocessor over user
assembler files (with a @samp{.s} suffix) when assembling them.

@item -mfix-24k
@item -mno-fix-24k
@opindex mfix-24k
@opindex mno-fix-24k
Work around the 24K E48 (lost data on stores during refill) errata.
The workarounds are implemented by the assembler rather than by LLVM@.

@item -mfix-r4000
@itemx -mno-fix-r4000
@opindex mfix-r4000
@opindex mno-fix-r4000
Work around certain R4000 CPU errata:
@itemize @minus
@item
A double-word or a variable shift may give an incorrect result if executed
immediately after starting an integer division.
@item
A double-word or a variable shift may give an incorrect result if executed
while an integer multiplication is in progress.
@item
An integer division may give an incorrect result if started in a delay slot
of a taken branch or a jump.
@end itemize

@item -mfix-r4400
@itemx -mno-fix-r4400
@opindex mfix-r4400
@opindex mno-fix-r4400
Work around certain R4400 CPU errata:
@itemize @minus
@item
A double-word or a variable shift may give an incorrect result if executed
immediately after starting an integer division.
@end itemize

@item -mfix-r10000
@itemx -mno-fix-r10000
@opindex mfix-r10000
@opindex mno-fix-r10000
Work around certain R10000 errata:
@itemize @minus
@item
@code{ll}/@code{sc} sequences may not behave atomically on revisions
prior to 3.0.  They may deadlock on revisions 2.6 and earlier.
@end itemize

This option can only be used if the target architecture supports
branch-likely instructions.  @option{-mfix-r10000} is the default when
@option{-march=r10000} is used; @option{-mno-fix-r10000} is the default
otherwise.

@item -mfix-rm7000
@itemx -mno-fix-rm7000
@opindex mfix-rm7000
Work around the RM7000 @code{dmult}/@code{dmultu} errata.  The
workarounds are implemented by the assembler rather than by LLVM@.

@item -mfix-vr4120
@itemx -mno-fix-vr4120
@opindex mfix-vr4120
Work around certain VR4120 errata:
@itemize @minus
@item
@code{dmultu} does not always produce the correct result.
@item
@code{div} and @code{ddiv} do not always produce the correct result if one
of the operands is negative.
@end itemize
The workarounds for the division errata rely on special functions in
@file{libgcc.a}.  At present, these functions are only provided by
the @code{mips64vr*-elf} configurations.

Other VR4120 errata require a NOP to be inserted between certain pairs of
instructions.  These errata are handled by the assembler, not by LLVM itself.

@item -mfix-vr4130
@opindex mfix-vr4130
Work around the VR4130 @code{mflo}/@code{mfhi} errata.  The
workarounds are implemented by the assembler rather than by LLVM,
although LLVM avoids using @code{mflo} and @code{mfhi} if the
VR4130 @code{macc}, @code{macchi}, @code{dmacc} and @code{dmacchi}
instructions are available instead.

@item -mfix-sb1
@itemx -mno-fix-sb1
@opindex mfix-sb1
Work around certain SB-1 CPU core errata.
(This flag currently works around the SB-1 revision 2
``F1'' and ``F2'' floating-point errata.)

@item -mr10k-cache-barrier=@var{setting}
@opindex mr10k-cache-barrier
Specify whether LLVM should insert cache barriers to avoid the
side-effects of speculation on R10K processors.

In common with many processors, the R10K tries to predict the outcome
of a conditional branch and speculatively executes instructions from
the ``taken'' branch.  It later aborts these instructions if the
predicted outcome is wrong.  However, on the R10K, even aborted
instructions can have side effects.

This problem only affects kernel stores and, depending on the system,
kernel loads.  As an example, a speculatively-executed store may load
the target memory into cache and mark the cache line as dirty, even if
the store itself is later aborted.  If a DMA operation writes to the
same area of memory before the ``dirty'' line is flushed, the cached
data overwrites the DMA-ed data.  See the R10K processor manual
for a full description, including other potential problems.

One workaround is to insert cache barrier instructions before every memory
access that might be speculatively executed and that might have side
effects even if aborted.  @option{-mr10k-cache-barrier=@var{setting}}
controls LLVM's implementation of this workaround.  It assumes that
aborted accesses to any byte in the following regions does not have
side effects:

@enumerate
@item
the memory occupied by the current function's stack frame;

@item
the memory occupied by an incoming stack argument;

@item
the memory occupied by an object with a link-time-constant address.
@end enumerate

It is the kernel's responsibility to ensure that speculative
accesses to these regions are indeed safe.

If the input program contains a function declaration such as:

@smallexample
void foo (void);
@end smallexample

then the implementation of @code{foo} must allow @code{j foo} and
@code{jal foo} to be executed speculatively.  LLVM honors this
restriction for functions it compiles itself.  It expects non-LLVM
functions (such as hand-written assembly code) to do the same.

The option has three forms:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -mr10k-cache-barrier=load-store
Insert a cache barrier before a load or store that might be
speculatively executed and that might have side effects even
if aborted.

@item -mr10k-cache-barrier=store
Insert a cache barrier before a store that might be speculatively
executed and that might have side effects even if aborted.

@item -mr10k-cache-barrier=none
Disable the insertion of cache barriers.  This is the default setting.
@end table

@item -mflush-func=@var{func}
@itemx -mno-flush-func
@opindex mflush-func
Specifies the function to call to flush the I and D caches, or to not
call any such function.  If called, the function must take the same
arguments as the common @code{_flush_func}, that is, the address of the
memory range for which the cache is being flushed, the size of the
memory range, and the number 3 (to flush both caches).  The default
depends on the target LLVM was configured for, but commonly is either
@code{_flush_func} or @code{__cpu_flush}.

@item mbranch-cost=@var{num}
@opindex mbranch-cost
Set the cost of branches to roughly @var{num} ``simple'' instructions.
This cost is only a heuristic and is not guaranteed to produce
consistent results across releases.  A zero cost redundantly selects
the default, which is based on the @option{-mtune} setting.

@item -mbranch-likely
@itemx -mno-branch-likely
@opindex mbranch-likely
@opindex mno-branch-likely
Enable or disable use of Branch Likely instructions, regardless of the
default for the selected architecture.  By default, Branch Likely
instructions may be generated if they are supported by the selected
architecture.  An exception is for the MIPS32 and MIPS64 architectures
and processors that implement those architectures; for those, Branch
Likely instructions are not be generated by default because the MIPS32
and MIPS64 architectures specifically deprecate their use.

@item -mfp-exceptions
@itemx -mno-fp-exceptions
@opindex mfp-exceptions
Specifies whether FP exceptions are enabled.  This affects how
FP instructions are scheduled for some processors.
The default is that FP exceptions are
enabled.

For instance, on the SB-1, if FP exceptions are disabled, and we are emitting
64-bit code, then we can use both FP pipes.  Otherwise, we can only use one
FP pipe.

@item -mvr4130-align
@itemx -mno-vr4130-align
@opindex mvr4130-align
The VR4130 pipeline is two-way superscalar, but can only issue two
instructions together if the first one is 8-byte aligned.  When this
option is enabled, LLVM aligns pairs of instructions that it
thinks should execute in parallel.

This option only has an effect when optimizing for the VR4130.
It normally makes code faster, but at the expense of making it bigger.
It is enabled by default at optimization level @option{-O3}.

@item -msynci
@itemx -mno-synci
@opindex msynci
Enable (disable) generation of @code{synci} instructions on
architectures that support it.  The @code{synci} instructions (if
enabled) are generated when @code{__builtin___clear_cache} is
compiled.

This option defaults to @option{-mno-synci}, but the default can be
overridden by configuring LLVM with @option{--with-synci}.

When compiling code for single processor systems, it is generally safe
to use @code{synci}.  However, on many multi-core (SMP) systems, it
does not invalidate the instruction caches on all cores and may lead
to undefined behavior.

@item -mrelax-pic-calls
@itemx -mno-relax-pic-calls
@opindex mrelax-pic-calls
Try to turn PIC calls that are normally dispatched via register
@code{$25} into direct calls.  This is only possible if the linker can
resolve the destination at link-time and if the destination is within
range for a direct call.

@option{-mrelax-pic-calls} is the default if LLVM was configured to use
an assembler and a linker that support the @code{.reloc} assembly
directive and @option{-mexplicit-relocs} is in effect.  With
@option{-mno-explicit-relocs}, this optimization can be performed by the
assembler and the linker alone without help from the compiler.

@item -mmcount-ra-address
@itemx -mno-mcount-ra-address
@opindex mmcount-ra-address
@opindex mno-mcount-ra-address
Emit (do not emit) code that allows @code{_mcount} to modify the
calling function's return address.  When enabled, this option extends
the usual @code{_mcount} interface with a new @var{ra-address}
parameter, which has type @code{intptr_t *} and is passed in register
@code{$12}.  @code{_mcount} can then modify the return address by
doing both of the following:
@itemize
@item
Returning the new address in register @code{$31}.
@item
Storing the new address in @code{*@var{ra-address}},
if @var{ra-address} is nonnull.
@end itemize

The default is @option{-mno-mcount-ra-address}.

@end table

@node MSP430 Options
@subsection MSP430 Options
@cindex MSP430 Options

These options are defined for the MSP430:

@table @gcctabopt

@item -masm-hex
@opindex masm-hex
Force assembly output to always use hex constants.  Normally such
constants are signed decimals, but this option is available for
testsuite and/or aesthetic purposes.

@item -mmcu=
@opindex mmcu=
Select the MCU to target.  This is used to create a C preprocessor
symbol based upon the MCU name, converted to upper case and pre- and
post-fixed with @samp{__}.  This in turn is used by the
@file{msp430.h} header file to select an MCU-specific supplementary
header file.

The option also sets the ISA to use.  If the MCU name is one that is
known to only support the 430 ISA then that is selected, otherwise the
430X ISA is selected.  A generic MCU name of @samp{msp430} can also be
used to select the 430 ISA.  Similarly the generic @samp{msp430x} MCU
name selects the 430X ISA.

In addition an MCU-specific linker script is added to the linker
command line.  The script's name is the name of the MCU with
@file{.ld} appended.  Thus specifying @option{-mmcu=xxx} on the @command{clang}
command line defines the C preprocessor symbol @code{__XXX__} and
cause the linker to search for a script called @file{xxx.ld}.

This option is also passed on to the assembler.

@item -mcpu=
@opindex mcpu=
Specifies the ISA to use.  Accepted values are @samp{msp430},
@samp{msp430x} and @samp{msp430xv2}.  This option is deprecated.  The
@option{-mmcu=} option should be used to select the ISA.

@item -msim
@opindex msim
Link to the simulator runtime libraries and linker script.  Overrides
any scripts that would be selected by the @option{-mmcu=} option.

@item -mlarge
@opindex mlarge
Use large-model addressing (20-bit pointers, 32-bit @code{size_t}).

@item -msmall
@opindex msmall
Use small-model addressing (16-bit pointers, 16-bit @code{size_t}).

@item -mrelax
@opindex mrelax
This option is passed to the assembler and linker, and allows the
linker to perform certain optimizations that cannot be done until
the final link.

@item mhwmult=
@opindex mhwmult=
Describes the type of hardware multiply supported by the target.
Accepted values are @samp{none} for no hardware multiply, @samp{16bit}
for the original 16-bit-only multiply supported by early MCUs.
@samp{32bit} for the 16/32-bit multiply supported by later MCUs and
@samp{f5series} for the 16/32-bit multiply supported by F5-series MCUs.
A value of @samp{auto} can also be given.  This tells LLVM to deduce
the hardware multiply support based upon the MCU name provided by the
@option{-mmcu} option.  If no @option{-mmcu} option is specified then
@samp{32bit} hardware multiply support is assumed.  @samp{auto} is the
default setting.

Hardware multiplies are normally performed by calling a library
routine.  This saves space in the generated code.  When compiling at
@option{-O3} or higher however the hardware multiplier is invoked
inline.  This makes for bigger, but faster code.

The hardware multiply routines disable interrupts whilst running and
restore the previous interrupt state when they finish.  This makes
them safe to use inside interrupt handlers as well as in normal code.

@item -minrt
@opindex minrt
Enable the use of a minimum runtime environment - no static
initializers or constructors.  This is intended for memory-constrained
devices.  The compiler includes special symbols in some objects
that tell the linker and runtime which code fragments are required.

@end table

@node Nvidia PTX Options
@subsection Nvidia PTX Options
@cindex Nvidia PTX options
@cindex nvptx options

These options are defined for Nvidia PTX:

@table @gcctabopt

@item -m32
@itemx -m64
@opindex m32
@opindex m64
Generate code for 32-bit or 64-bit ABI.

@item -mmainkernel
@opindex mmainkernel
Link in code for a __main kernel.  This is for stand-alone instead of
offloading execution.

@end table

@node PowerPC Options
@subsection PowerPC Options
@cindex PowerPC options

These are listed under @xref{RS/6000 and PowerPC Options}.

@node RS/6000 and PowerPC Options
@subsection IBM RS/6000 and PowerPC Options
@cindex RS/6000 and PowerPC Options
@cindex IBM RS/6000 and PowerPC Options

These @samp{-m} options are defined for the IBM RS/6000 and PowerPC:
@table @gcctabopt
@item -mpowerpc-gpopt
@itemx -mno-powerpc-gpopt
@itemx -mpowerpc-gfxopt
@itemx -mno-powerpc-gfxopt
@need 800
@itemx -mpowerpc64
@itemx -mno-powerpc64
@itemx -mmfcrf
@itemx -mno-mfcrf
@itemx -mpopcntb
@itemx -mno-popcntb
@itemx -mpopcntd
@itemx -mno-popcntd
@itemx -mfprnd
@itemx -mno-fprnd
@need 800
@itemx -mcmpb
@itemx -mno-cmpb
@itemx -mmfpgpr
@itemx -mno-mfpgpr
@itemx -mhard-dfp
@itemx -mno-hard-dfp
@opindex mpowerpc-gpopt
@opindex mno-powerpc-gpopt
@opindex mpowerpc-gfxopt
@opindex mno-powerpc-gfxopt
@opindex mpowerpc64
@opindex mno-powerpc64
@opindex mmfcrf
@opindex mno-mfcrf
@opindex mpopcntb
@opindex mno-popcntb
@opindex mpopcntd
@opindex mno-popcntd
@opindex mfprnd
@opindex mno-fprnd
@opindex mcmpb
@opindex mno-cmpb
@opindex mmfpgpr
@opindex mno-mfpgpr
@opindex mhard-dfp
@opindex mno-hard-dfp
You use these options to specify which instructions are available on the
processor you are using.  The default value of these options is
determined when configuring LLVM@.  Specifying the
@option{-mcpu=@var{cpu_type}} overrides the specification of these
options.  We recommend you use the @option{-mcpu=@var{cpu_type}} option
rather than the options listed above.

Specifying @option{-mpowerpc-gpopt} allows
LLVM to use the optional PowerPC architecture instructions in the
General Purpose group, including floating-point square root.  Specifying
@option{-mpowerpc-gfxopt} allows LLVM to
use the optional PowerPC architecture instructions in the Graphics
group, including floating-point select.

The @option{-mmfcrf} option allows LLVM to generate the move from
condition register field instruction implemented on the POWER4
processor and other processors that support the PowerPC V2.01
architecture.
The @option{-mpopcntb} option allows LLVM to generate the popcount and
double-precision FP reciprocal estimate instruction implemented on the
POWER5 processor and other processors that support the PowerPC V2.02
architecture.
The @option{-mpopcntd} option allows LLVM to generate the popcount
instruction implemented on the POWER7 processor and other processors
that support the PowerPC V2.06 architecture.
The @option{-mfprnd} option allows LLVM to generate the FP round to
integer instructions implemented on the POWER5+ processor and other
processors that support the PowerPC V2.03 architecture.
The @option{-mcmpb} option allows LLVM to generate the compare bytes
instruction implemented on the POWER6 processor and other processors
that support the PowerPC V2.05 architecture.
The @option{-mmfpgpr} option allows LLVM to generate the FP move to/from
general-purpose register instructions implemented on the POWER6X
processor and other processors that support the extended PowerPC V2.05
architecture.
The @option{-mhard-dfp} option allows LLVM to generate the decimal
floating-point instructions implemented on some POWER processors.

The @option{-mpowerpc64} option allows LLVM to generate the additional
64-bit instructions that are found in the full PowerPC64 architecture
and to treat GPRs as 64-bit, doubleword quantities.  LLVM defaults to
@option{-mno-powerpc64}.

@item -mcpu=@var{cpu_type}
@opindex mcpu
Set architecture type, register usage, and
instruction scheduling parameters for machine type @var{cpu_type}.
Supported values for @var{cpu_type} are @samp{401}, @samp{403},
@samp{405}, @samp{405fp}, @samp{440}, @samp{440fp}, @samp{464}, @samp{464fp},
@samp{476}, @samp{476fp}, @samp{505}, @samp{601}, @samp{602}, @samp{603},
@samp{603e}, @samp{604}, @samp{604e}, @samp{620}, @samp{630}, @samp{740},
@samp{7400}, @samp{7450}, @samp{750}, @samp{801}, @samp{821}, @samp{823},
@samp{860}, @samp{970}, @samp{8540}, @samp{a2}, @samp{e300c2},
@samp{e300c3}, @samp{e500mc}, @samp{e500mc64}, @samp{e5500},
@samp{e6500}, @samp{ec603e}, @samp{G3}, @samp{G4}, @samp{G5},
@samp{titan}, @samp{power3}, @samp{power4}, @samp{power5}, @samp{power5+},
@samp{power6}, @samp{power6x}, @samp{power7}, @samp{power8}, @samp{powerpc},
@samp{powerpc64}, @samp{powerpc64le}, and @samp{rs64}.

@option{-mcpu=powerpc}, @option{-mcpu=powerpc64}, and
@option{-mcpu=powerpc64le} specify pure 32-bit PowerPC (either
endian), 64-bit big endian PowerPC and 64-bit little endian PowerPC
architecture machine types, with an appropriate, generic processor
model assumed for scheduling purposes.

The other options specify a specific processor.  Code generated under
those options runs best on that processor, and may not run at all on
others.

The @option{-mcpu} options automatically enable or disable the
following options:

@gccoptlist{-maltivec  -mfprnd  -mhard-float  -mmfcrf  -mmultiple @gol
-mpopcntb -mpopcntd  -mpowerpc64 @gol
-mpowerpc-gpopt  -mpowerpc-gfxopt  -msingle-float -mdouble-float @gol
-msimple-fpu -mstring  -mmulhw  -mdlmzb  -mmfpgpr -mvsx @gol
-mcrypto -mdirect-move -mpower8-fusion -mpower8-vector @gol
-mquad-memory -mquad-memory-atomic}

The particular options set for any particular CPU varies between
compiler versions, depending on what setting seems to produce optimal
code for that CPU; it doesn't necessarily reflect the actual hardware's
capabilities.  If you wish to set an individual option to a particular
value, you may specify it after the @option{-mcpu} option, like
@option{-mcpu=970 -mno-altivec}.

On AIX, the @option{-maltivec} and @option{-mpowerpc64} options are
not enabled or disabled by the @option{-mcpu} option at present because
AIX does not have full support for these options.  You may still
enable or disable them individually if you're sure it'll work in your
environment.

@item -mtune=@var{cpu_type}
@opindex mtune
Set the instruction scheduling parameters for machine type
@var{cpu_type}, but do not set the architecture type or register usage,
as @option{-mcpu=@var{cpu_type}} does.  The same
values for @var{cpu_type} are used for @option{-mtune} as for
@option{-mcpu}.  If both are specified, the code generated uses the
architecture and registers set by @option{-mcpu}, but the
scheduling parameters set by @option{-mtune}.

@item -mcmodel=small
@opindex mcmodel=small
Generate PowerPC64 code for the small model: The TOC is limited to
64k.

@item -mcmodel=medium
@opindex mcmodel=medium
Generate PowerPC64 code for the medium model: The TOC and other static
data may be up to a total of 4G in size.

@item -mcmodel=large
@opindex mcmodel=large
Generate PowerPC64 code for the large model: The TOC may be up to 4G
in size.  Other data and code is only limited by the 64-bit address
space.

@item -maltivec
@itemx -mno-altivec
@opindex maltivec
@opindex mno-altivec
Generate code that uses (does not use) AltiVec instructions, and also
enable the use of built-in functions that allow more direct access to
the AltiVec instruction set.  You may also need to set
@option{-mabi=altivec} to adjust the current ABI with AltiVec ABI
enhancements.

When @option{-maltivec} is used, rather than @option{-maltivec=le} or
@option{-maltivec=be}, the element order for Altivec intrinsics such
as @code{vec_splat}, @code{vec_extract}, and @code{vec_insert}
match array element order corresponding to the endianness of the
target.  That is, element zero identifies the leftmost element in a
vector register when targeting a big-endian platform, and identifies
the rightmost element in a vector register when targeting a
little-endian platform.

@item -maltivec=be
@opindex maltivec=be
Generate Altivec instructions using big-endian element order,
regardless of whether the target is big- or little-endian.  This is
the default when targeting a big-endian platform.

The element order is used to interpret element numbers in Altivec
intrinsics such as @code{vec_splat}, @code{vec_extract}, and
@code{vec_insert}.  By default, these match array element order
corresponding to the endianness for the target.

@item -maltivec=le
@opindex maltivec=le
Generate Altivec instructions using little-endian element order,
regardless of whether the target is big- or little-endian.  This is
the default when targeting a little-endian platform.  This option is
currently ignored when targeting a big-endian platform.

The element order is used to interpret element numbers in Altivec
intrinsics such as @code{vec_splat}, @code{vec_extract}, and
@code{vec_insert}.  By default, these match array element order
corresponding to the endianness for the target.

@item -mvrsave
@itemx -mno-vrsave
@opindex mvrsave
@opindex mno-vrsave
Generate VRSAVE instructions when generating AltiVec code.

@item -mgen-cell-microcode
@opindex mgen-cell-microcode
Generate Cell microcode instructions.

@item -mwarn-cell-microcode
@opindex mwarn-cell-microcode
Warn when a Cell microcode instruction is emitted.  An example
of a Cell microcode instruction is a variable shift.

@item -msecure-plt
@opindex msecure-plt
Generate code that allows @command{ld} and @command{ld.so}
to build executables and shared
libraries with non-executable @code{.plt} and @code{.got} sections.
This is a PowerPC
32-bit SYSV ABI option.

@item -mbss-plt
@opindex mbss-plt
Generate code that uses a BSS @code{.plt} section that @command{ld.so}
fills in, and
requires @code{.plt} and @code{.got}
sections that are both writable and executable.
This is a PowerPC 32-bit SYSV ABI option.

@item -misel
@itemx -mno-isel
@opindex misel
@opindex mno-isel
This switch enables or disables the generation of ISEL instructions.

@item -misel=@var{yes/no}
This switch has been deprecated.  Use @option{-misel} and
@option{-mno-isel} instead.

@item -mspe
@itemx -mno-spe
@opindex mspe
@opindex mno-spe
This switch enables or disables the generation of SPE simd
instructions.

@item -mpaired
@itemx -mno-paired
@opindex mpaired
@opindex mno-paired
This switch enables or disables the generation of PAIRED simd
instructions.

@item -mspe=@var{yes/no}
This option has been deprecated.  Use @option{-mspe} and
@option{-mno-spe} instead.

@item -mvsx
@itemx -mno-vsx
@opindex mvsx
@opindex mno-vsx
Generate code that uses (does not use) vector/scalar (VSX)
instructions, and also enable the use of built-in functions that allow
more direct access to the VSX instruction set.

@item -mcrypto
@itemx -mno-crypto
@opindex mcrypto
@opindex mno-crypto
Enable the use (disable) of the built-in functions that allow direct
access to the cryptographic instructions that were added in version
2.07 of the PowerPC ISA.

@item -mdirect-move
@itemx -mno-direct-move
@opindex mdirect-move
@opindex mno-direct-move
Generate code that uses (does not use) the instructions to move data
between the general purpose registers and the vector/scalar (VSX)
registers that were added in version 2.07 of the PowerPC ISA.

@item -mpower8-fusion
@itemx -mno-power8-fusion
@opindex mpower8-fusion
@opindex mno-power8-fusion
Generate code that keeps (does not keeps) some integer operations
adjacent so that the instructions can be fused together on power8 and
later processors.

@item -mpower8-vector
@itemx -mno-power8-vector
@opindex mpower8-vector
@opindex mno-power8-vector
Generate code that uses (does not use) the vector and scalar
instructions that were added in version 2.07 of the PowerPC ISA.  Also
enable the use of built-in functions that allow more direct access to
the vector instructions.

@item -mquad-memory
@itemx -mno-quad-memory
@opindex mquad-memory
@opindex mno-quad-memory
Generate code that uses (does not use) the non-atomic quad word memory
instructions.  The @option{-mquad-memory} option requires use of
64-bit mode.

@item -mquad-memory-atomic
@itemx -mno-quad-memory-atomic
@opindex mquad-memory-atomic
@opindex mno-quad-memory-atomic
Generate code that uses (does not use) the atomic quad word memory
instructions.  The @option{-mquad-memory-atomic} option requires use of
64-bit mode.

@item -mupper-regs-df
@itemx -mno-upper-regs-df
@opindex mupper-regs-df
@opindex mno-upper-regs-df
Generate code that uses (does not use) the scalar double precision
instructions that target all 64 registers in the vector/scalar
floating point register set that were added in version 2.06 of the
PowerPC ISA.  The @option{-mupper-regs-df} turned on by default if you
use either of the @option{-mcpu=power7}, @option{-mcpu=power8}, or
@option{-mvsx} options.

@item -mupper-regs-sf
@itemx -mno-upper-regs-sf
@opindex mupper-regs-sf
@opindex mno-upper-regs-sf
Generate code that uses (does not use) the scalar single precision
instructions that target all 64 registers in the vector/scalar
floating point register set that were added in version 2.07 of the
PowerPC ISA.  The @option{-mupper-regs-sf} turned on by default if you
use either of the @option{-mcpu=power8}, or @option{-mpower8-vector}
options.

@item -mupper-regs
@itemx -mno-upper-regs
@opindex mupper-regs
@opindex mno-upper-regs
Generate code that uses (does not use) the scalar
instructions that target all 64 registers in the vector/scalar
floating point register set, depending on the model of the machine.

If the @option{-mno-upper-regs} option is used, it turns off both
@option{-mupper-regs-sf} and @option{-mupper-regs-df} options.

@item -mfloat-gprs=@var{yes/single/double/no}
@itemx -mfloat-gprs
@opindex mfloat-gprs
This switch enables or disables the generation of floating-point
operations on the general-purpose registers for architectures that
support it.

The argument @samp{yes} or @samp{single} enables the use of
single-precision floating-point operations.

The argument @samp{double} enables the use of single and
double-precision floating-point operations.

The argument @samp{no} disables floating-point operations on the
general-purpose registers.

This option is currently only available on the MPC854x.

@item -m32
@itemx -m64
@opindex m32
@opindex m64
Generate code for 32-bit or 64-bit environments of Darwin and SVR4
targets (including GNU/Linux).  The 32-bit environment sets int, long
and pointer to 32 bits and generates code that runs on any PowerPC
variant.  The 64-bit environment sets int to 32 bits and long and
pointer to 64 bits, and generates code for PowerPC64, as for
@option{-mpowerpc64}.

@item -mfull-toc
@itemx -mno-fp-in-toc
@itemx -mno-sum-in-toc
@itemx -mminimal-toc
@opindex mfull-toc
@opindex mno-fp-in-toc
@opindex mno-sum-in-toc
@opindex mminimal-toc
Modify generation of the TOC (Table Of Contents), which is created for
every executable file.  The @option{-mfull-toc} option is selected by
default.  In that case, LLVM allocates at least one TOC entry for
each unique non-automatic variable reference in your program.  LLVM
also places floating-point constants in the TOC@.  However, only
16,384 entries are available in the TOC@.

If you receive a linker error message that saying you have overflowed
the available TOC space, you can reduce the amount of TOC space used
with the @option{-mno-fp-in-toc} and @option{-mno-sum-in-toc} options.
@option{-mno-fp-in-toc} prevents LLVM from putting floating-point
constants in the TOC and @option{-mno-sum-in-toc} forces LLVM to
generate code to calculate the sum of an address and a constant at
run time instead of putting that sum into the TOC@.  You may specify one
or both of these options.  Each causes LLVM to produce very slightly
slower and larger code at the expense of conserving TOC space.

If you still run out of space in the TOC even when you specify both of
these options, specify @option{-mminimal-toc} instead.  This option causes
LLVM to make only one TOC entry for every file.  When you specify this
option, LLVM produces code that is slower and larger but which
uses extremely little TOC space.  You may wish to use this option
only on files that contain less frequently-executed code.

@item -maix64
@itemx -maix32
@opindex maix64
@opindex maix32
Enable 64-bit AIX ABI and calling convention: 64-bit pointers, 64-bit
@code{long} type, and the infrastructure needed to support them.
Specifying @option{-maix64} implies @option{-mpowerpc64},
while @option{-maix32} disables the 64-bit ABI and
implies @option{-mno-powerpc64}.  LLVM defaults to @option{-maix32}.

@item -mxl-compat
@itemx -mno-xl-compat
@opindex mxl-compat
@opindex mno-xl-compat
Produce code that conforms more closely to IBM XL compiler semantics
when using AIX-compatible ABI@.  Pass floating-point arguments to
prototyped functions beyond the register save area (RSA) on the stack
in addition to argument FPRs.  Do not assume that most significant
double in 128-bit long double value is properly rounded when comparing
values and converting to double.  Use XL symbol names for long double
support routines.

The AIX calling convention was extended but not initially documented to
handle an obscure K&R C case of calling a function that takes the
address of its arguments with fewer arguments than declared.  IBM XL
compilers access floating-point arguments that do not fit in the
RSA from the stack when a subroutine is compiled without
optimization.  Because always storing floating-point arguments on the
stack is inefficient and rarely needed, this option is not enabled by
default and only is necessary when calling subroutines compiled by IBM
XL compilers without optimization.

@item -mpe
@opindex mpe
Support @dfn{IBM RS/6000 SP} @dfn{Parallel Environment} (PE)@.  Link an
application written to use message passing with special startup code to
enable the application to run.  The system must have PE installed in the
standard location (@file{/usr/lpp/ppe.poe/}), or the @file{specs} file
must be overridden with the @option{-specs=} option to specify the
appropriate directory location.  The Parallel Environment does not
support threads, so the @option{-mpe} option and the @option{-pthread}
option are incompatible.

@item -malign-natural
@itemx -malign-power
@opindex malign-natural
@opindex malign-power
On AIX, 32-bit Darwin, and 64-bit PowerPC GNU/Linux, the option
@option{-malign-natural} overrides the ABI-defined alignment of larger
types, such as floating-point doubles, on their natural size-based boundary.
The option @option{-malign-power} instructs LLVM to follow the ABI-specified
alignment rules.  LLVM defaults to the standard alignment defined in the ABI@.

On 64-bit Darwin, natural alignment is the default, and @option{-malign-power}
is not supported.

@item -msoft-float
@itemx -mhard-float
@opindex msoft-float
@opindex mhard-float
Generate code that does not use (uses) the floating-point register set.
Software floating-point emulation is provided if you use the
@option{-msoft-float} option, and pass the option to LLVM when linking.

@item -msingle-float
@itemx -mdouble-float
@opindex msingle-float
@opindex mdouble-float
Generate code for single- or double-precision floating-point operations.
@option{-mdouble-float} implies @option{-msingle-float}.

@item -msimple-fpu
@opindex msimple-fpu
Do not generate @code{sqrt} and @code{div} instructions for hardware
floating-point unit.

@item -mfpu=@var{name}
@opindex mfpu
Specify type of floating-point unit.  Valid values for @var{name} are
@samp{sp_lite} (equivalent to @option{-msingle-float -msimple-fpu}),
@samp{dp_lite} (equivalent to @option{-mdouble-float -msimple-fpu}),
@samp{sp_full} (equivalent to @option{-msingle-float}),
and @samp{dp_full} (equivalent to @option{-mdouble-float}).

@item -mxilinx-fpu
@opindex mxilinx-fpu
Perform optimizations for the floating-point unit on Xilinx PPC 405/440.

@item -mmultiple
@itemx -mno-multiple
@opindex mmultiple
@opindex mno-multiple
Generate code that uses (does not use) the load multiple word
instructions and the store multiple word instructions.  These
instructions are generated by default on POWER systems, and not
generated on PowerPC systems.  Do not use @option{-mmultiple} on little-endian
PowerPC systems, since those instructions do not work when the
processor is in little-endian mode.  The exceptions are PPC740 and
PPC750 which permit these instructions in little-endian mode.

@item -mstring
@itemx -mno-string
@opindex mstring
@opindex mno-string
Generate code that uses (does not use) the load string instructions
and the store string word instructions to save multiple registers and
do small block moves.  These instructions are generated by default on
POWER systems, and not generated on PowerPC systems.  Do not use
@option{-mstring} on little-endian PowerPC systems, since those
instructions do not work when the processor is in little-endian mode.
The exceptions are PPC740 and PPC750 which permit these instructions
in little-endian mode.

@item -mupdate
@itemx -mno-update
@opindex mupdate
@opindex mno-update
Generate code that uses (does not use) the load or store instructions
that update the base register to the address of the calculated memory
location.  These instructions are generated by default.  If you use
@option{-mno-update}, there is a small window between the time that the
stack pointer is updated and the address of the previous frame is
stored, which means code that walks the stack frame across interrupts or
signals may get corrupted data.

@item -mavoid-indexed-addresses
@itemx -mno-avoid-indexed-addresses
@opindex mavoid-indexed-addresses
@opindex mno-avoid-indexed-addresses
Generate code that tries to avoid (not avoid) the use of indexed load
or store instructions. These instructions can incur a performance
penalty on Power6 processors in certain situations, such as when
stepping through large arrays that cross a 16M boundary.  This option
is enabled by default when targeting Power6 and disabled otherwise.

@item -mfused-madd
@itemx -mno-fused-madd
@opindex mfused-madd
@opindex mno-fused-madd
Generate code that uses (does not use) the floating-point multiply and
accumulate instructions.  These instructions are generated by default
if hardware floating point is used.  The machine-dependent
@option{-mfused-madd} option is now mapped to the machine-independent
@option{-ffp-contract=fast} option, and @option{-mno-fused-madd} is
mapped to @option{-ffp-contract=off}.

@item -mmulhw
@itemx -mno-mulhw
@opindex mmulhw
@opindex mno-mulhw
Generate code that uses (does not use) the half-word multiply and
multiply-accumulate instructions on the IBM 405, 440, 464 and 476 processors.
These instructions are generated by default when targeting those
processors.

@item -mdlmzb
@itemx -mno-dlmzb
@opindex mdlmzb
@opindex mno-dlmzb
Generate code that uses (does not use) the string-search @samp{dlmzb}
instruction on the IBM 405, 440, 464 and 476 processors.  This instruction is
generated by default when targeting those processors.

@item -mno-bit-align
@itemx -mbit-align
@opindex mno-bit-align
@opindex mbit-align
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems do not (do) force structures
and unions that contain bit-fields to be aligned to the base type of the
bit-field.

For example, by default a structure containing nothing but 8
@code{unsigned} bit-fields of length 1 is aligned to a 4-byte
boundary and has a size of 4 bytes.  By using @option{-mno-bit-align},
the structure is aligned to a 1-byte boundary and is 1 byte in
size.

@item -mno-strict-align
@itemx -mstrict-align
@opindex mno-strict-align
@opindex mstrict-align
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems do not (do) assume that
unaligned memory references are handled by the system.

@item -mrelocatable
@itemx -mno-relocatable
@opindex mrelocatable
@opindex mno-relocatable
Generate code that allows (does not allow) a static executable to be
relocated to a different address at run time.  A simple embedded
PowerPC system loader should relocate the entire contents of
@code{.got2} and 4-byte locations listed in the @code{.fixup} section,
a table of 32-bit addresses generated by this option.  For this to
work, all objects linked together must be compiled with
@option{-mrelocatable} or @option{-mrelocatable-lib}.
@option{-mrelocatable} code aligns the stack to an 8-byte boundary.

@item -mrelocatable-lib
@itemx -mno-relocatable-lib
@opindex mrelocatable-lib
@opindex mno-relocatable-lib
Like @option{-mrelocatable}, @option{-mrelocatable-lib} generates a
@code{.fixup} section to allow static executables to be relocated at
run time, but @option{-mrelocatable-lib} does not use the smaller stack
alignment of @option{-mrelocatable}.  Objects compiled with
@option{-mrelocatable-lib} may be linked with objects compiled with
any combination of the @option{-mrelocatable} options.

@item -mno-toc
@itemx -mtoc
@opindex mno-toc
@opindex mtoc
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems do not (do) assume that
register 2 contains a pointer to a global area pointing to the addresses
used in the program.

@item -mlittle
@itemx -mlittle-endian
@opindex mlittle
@opindex mlittle-endian
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems compile code for the
processor in little-endian mode.  The @option{-mlittle-endian} option is
the same as @option{-mlittle}.

@item -mbig
@itemx -mbig-endian
@opindex mbig
@opindex mbig-endian
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems compile code for the
processor in big-endian mode.  The @option{-mbig-endian} option is
the same as @option{-mbig}.

@item -mdynamic-no-pic
@opindex mdynamic-no-pic
On Darwin and Mac OS X systems, compile code so that it is not
relocatable, but that its external references are relocatable.  The
resulting code is suitable for applications, but not shared
libraries.

@item -msingle-pic-base
@opindex msingle-pic-base
Treat the register used for PIC addressing as read-only, rather than
loading it in the prologue for each function.  The runtime system is
responsible for initializing this register with an appropriate value
before execution begins.

@item -mprioritize-restricted-insns=@var{priority}
@opindex mprioritize-restricted-insns
This option controls the priority that is assigned to
dispatch-slot restricted instructions during the second scheduling
pass.  The argument @var{priority} takes the value @samp{0}, @samp{1},
or @samp{2} to assign no, highest, or second-highest (respectively)
priority to dispatch-slot restricted
instructions.

@item -msched-costly-dep=@var{dependence_type}
@opindex msched-costly-dep
This option controls which dependences are considered costly
by the target during instruction scheduling.  The argument
@var{dependence_type} takes one of the following values:

@table @asis
@item @samp{no}
No dependence is costly.

@item @samp{all}
All dependences are costly.

@item @samp{true_store_to_load}
A true dependence from store to load is costly.

@item @samp{store_to_load}
Any dependence from store to load is costly.

@item @var{number}
Any dependence for which the latency is greater than or equal to
@var{number} is costly.
@end table

@item -minsert-sched-nops=@var{scheme}
@opindex minsert-sched-nops
This option controls which NOP insertion scheme is used during
the second scheduling pass.  The argument @var{scheme} takes one of the
following values:

@table @asis
@item @samp{no}
Don't insert NOPs.

@item @samp{pad}
Pad with NOPs any dispatch group that has vacant issue slots,
according to the scheduler's grouping.

@item @samp{regroup_exact}
Insert NOPs to force costly dependent insns into
separate groups.  Insert exactly as many NOPs as needed to force an insn
to a new group, according to the estimated processor grouping.

@item @var{number}
Insert NOPs to force costly dependent insns into
separate groups.  Insert @var{number} NOPs to force an insn to a new group.
@end table

@item -mcall-sysv
@opindex mcall-sysv
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems compile code using calling
conventions that adhere to the March 1995 draft of the System V
Application Binary Interface, PowerPC processor supplement.  This is the
default unless you configured LLVM using @samp{powerpc-*-eabiaix}.

@item -mcall-sysv-eabi
@itemx -mcall-eabi
@opindex mcall-sysv-eabi
@opindex mcall-eabi
Specify both @option{-mcall-sysv} and @option{-meabi} options.

@item -mcall-sysv-noeabi
@opindex mcall-sysv-noeabi
Specify both @option{-mcall-sysv} and @option{-mno-eabi} options.

@item -mcall-aixdesc
@opindex m
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems compile code for the AIX
operating system.

@item -mcall-linux
@opindex mcall-linux
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems compile code for the
Linux-based GNU system.

@item -mcall-freebsd
@opindex mcall-freebsd
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems compile code for the
FreeBSD operating system.

@item -mcall-netbsd
@opindex mcall-netbsd
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems compile code for the
NetBSD operating system.

@item -mcall-openbsd
@opindex mcall-netbsd
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems compile code for the
OpenBSD operating system.

@item -maix-struct-return
@opindex maix-struct-return
Return all structures in memory (as specified by the AIX ABI)@.

@item -msvr4-struct-return
@opindex msvr4-struct-return
Return structures smaller than 8 bytes in registers (as specified by the
SVR4 ABI)@.

@item -mabi=@var{abi-type}
@opindex mabi
Extend the current ABI with a particular extension, or remove such extension.
Valid values are @samp{altivec}, @samp{no-altivec}, @samp{spe},
@samp{no-spe}, @samp{ibmlongdouble}, @samp{ieeelongdouble},
@samp{elfv1}, @samp{elfv2}@.

@item -mabi=spe
@opindex mabi=spe
Extend the current ABI with SPE ABI extensions.  This does not change
the default ABI, instead it adds the SPE ABI extensions to the current
ABI@.

@item -mabi=no-spe
@opindex mabi=no-spe
Disable Book-E SPE ABI extensions for the current ABI@.

@item -mabi=ibmlongdouble
@opindex mabi=ibmlongdouble
Change the current ABI to use IBM extended-precision long double.
This is a PowerPC 32-bit SYSV ABI option.

@item -mabi=ieeelongdouble
@opindex mabi=ieeelongdouble
Change the current ABI to use IEEE extended-precision long double.
This is a PowerPC 32-bit Linux ABI option.

@item -mabi=elfv1
@opindex mabi=elfv1
Change the current ABI to use the ELFv1 ABI.
This is the default ABI for big-endian PowerPC 64-bit Linux.
Overriding the default ABI requires special system support and is
likely to fail in spectacular ways.

@item -mabi=elfv2
@opindex mabi=elfv2
Change the current ABI to use the ELFv2 ABI.
This is the default ABI for little-endian PowerPC 64-bit Linux.
Overriding the default ABI requires special system support and is
likely to fail in spectacular ways.

@item -mprototype
@itemx -mno-prototype
@opindex mprototype
@opindex mno-prototype
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems assume that all calls to
variable argument functions are properly prototyped.  Otherwise, the
compiler must insert an instruction before every non-prototyped call to
set or clear bit 6 of the condition code register (@code{CR}) to
indicate whether floating-point values are passed in the floating-point
registers in case the function takes variable arguments.  With
@option{-mprototype}, only calls to prototyped variable argument functions
set or clear the bit.

@item -msim
@opindex msim
On embedded PowerPC systems, assume that the startup module is called
@file{sim-crt0.o} and that the standard C libraries are @file{libsim.a} and
@file{libc.a}.  This is the default for @samp{powerpc-*-eabisim}
configurations.

@item -mmvme
@opindex mmvme
On embedded PowerPC systems, assume that the startup module is called
@file{crt0.o} and the standard C libraries are @file{libmvme.a} and
@file{libc.a}.

@item -mads
@opindex mads
On embedded PowerPC systems, assume that the startup module is called
@file{crt0.o} and the standard C libraries are @file{libads.a} and
@file{libc.a}.

@item -myellowknife
@opindex myellowknife
On embedded PowerPC systems, assume that the startup module is called
@file{crt0.o} and the standard C libraries are @file{libyk.a} and
@file{libc.a}.

@item -mvxworks
@opindex mvxworks
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems, specify that you are
compiling for a VxWorks system.

@item -memb
@opindex memb
On embedded PowerPC systems, set the @code{PPC_EMB} bit in the ELF flags
header to indicate that @samp{eabi} extended relocations are used.

@item -meabi
@itemx -mno-eabi
@opindex meabi
@opindex mno-eabi
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems do (do not) adhere to the
Embedded Applications Binary Interface (EABI), which is a set of
modifications to the System V.4 specifications.  Selecting @option{-meabi}
means that the stack is aligned to an 8-byte boundary, a function
@code{__eabi} is called from @code{main} to set up the EABI
environment, and the @option{-msdata} option can use both @code{r2} and
@code{r13} to point to two separate small data areas.  Selecting
@option{-mno-eabi} means that the stack is aligned to a 16-byte boundary,
no EABI initialization function is called from @code{main}, and the
@option{-msdata} option only uses @code{r13} to point to a single
small data area.  The @option{-meabi} option is on by default if you
configured LLVM using one of the @samp{powerpc*-*-eabi*} options.

@item -msdata=eabi
@opindex msdata=eabi
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems, put small initialized
@code{const} global and static data in the @code{.sdata2} section, which
is pointed to by register @code{r2}.  Put small initialized
non-@code{const} global and static data in the @code{.sdata} section,
which is pointed to by register @code{r13}.  Put small uninitialized
global and static data in the @code{.sbss} section, which is adjacent to
the @code{.sdata} section.  The @option{-msdata=eabi} option is
incompatible with the @option{-mrelocatable} option.  The
@option{-msdata=eabi} option also sets the @option{-memb} option.

@item -msdata=sysv
@opindex msdata=sysv
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems, put small global and static
data in the @code{.sdata} section, which is pointed to by register
@code{r13}.  Put small uninitialized global and static data in the
@code{.sbss} section, which is adjacent to the @code{.sdata} section.
The @option{-msdata=sysv} option is incompatible with the
@option{-mrelocatable} option.

@item -msdata=default
@itemx -msdata
@opindex msdata=default
@opindex msdata
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems, if @option{-meabi} is used,
compile code the same as @option{-msdata=eabi}, otherwise compile code the
same as @option{-msdata=sysv}.

@item -msdata=data
@opindex msdata=data
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems, put small global
data in the @code{.sdata} section.  Put small uninitialized global
data in the @code{.sbss} section.  Do not use register @code{r13}
to address small data however.  This is the default behavior unless
other @option{-msdata} options are used.

@item -msdata=none
@itemx -mno-sdata
@opindex msdata=none
@opindex mno-sdata
On embedded PowerPC systems, put all initialized global and static data
in the @code{.data} section, and all uninitialized data in the
@code{.bss} section.

@item -mblock-move-inline-limit=@var{num}
@opindex mblock-move-inline-limit
Inline all block moves (such as calls to @code{memcpy} or structure
copies) less than or equal to @var{num} bytes.  The minimum value for
@var{num} is 32 bytes on 32-bit targets and 64 bytes on 64-bit
targets.  The default value is target-specific.

@item -G @var{num}
@opindex G
@cindex smaller data references (PowerPC)
@cindex .sdata/.sdata2 references (PowerPC)
On embedded PowerPC systems, put global and static items less than or
equal to @var{num} bytes into the small data or BSS sections instead of
the normal data or BSS section.  By default, @var{num} is 8.  The
@option{-G @var{num}} switch is also passed to the linker.
All modules should be compiled with the same @option{-G @var{num}} value.

@item -mregnames
@itemx -mno-regnames
@opindex mregnames
@opindex mno-regnames
On System V.4 and embedded PowerPC systems do (do not) emit register
names in the assembly language output using symbolic forms.

@item -mlongcall
@itemx -mno-longcall
@opindex mlongcall
@opindex mno-longcall
By default assume that all calls are far away so that a longer and more
expensive calling sequence is required.  This is required for calls
farther than 32 megabytes (33,554,432 bytes) from the current location.
A short call is generated if the compiler knows
the call cannot be that far away.  This setting can be overridden by
the @code{shortcall} function attribute, or by @code{#pragma
longcall(0)}.

Some linkers are capable of detecting out-of-range calls and generating
glue code on the fly.  On these systems, long calls are unnecessary and
generate slower code.  As of this writing, the AIX linker can do this,
as can the GNU linker for PowerPC/64.  It is planned to add this feature
to the GNU linker for 32-bit PowerPC systems as well.

On Darwin/PPC systems, @code{#pragma longcall} generates @code{jbsr
callee, L42}, plus a @dfn{branch island} (glue code).  The two target
addresses represent the callee and the branch island.  The
Darwin/PPC linker prefers the first address and generates a @code{bl
callee} if the PPC @code{bl} instruction reaches the callee directly;
otherwise, the linker generates @code{bl L42} to call the branch
island.  The branch island is appended to the body of the
calling function; it computes the full 32-bit address of the callee
and jumps to it.

On Mach-O (Darwin) systems, this option directs the compiler emit to
the glue for every direct call, and the Darwin linker decides whether
to use or discard it.

In the future, LLVM may ignore all longcall specifications
when the linker is known to generate glue.

@item -mtls-markers
@itemx -mno-tls-markers
@opindex mtls-markers
@opindex mno-tls-markers
Mark (do not mark) calls to @code{__tls_get_addr} with a relocation
specifying the function argument.  The relocation allows the linker to
reliably associate function call with argument setup instructions for
TLS optimization, which in turn allows LLVM to better schedule the
sequence.

@item -pthread
@opindex pthread
Adds support for multithreading with the @dfn{pthreads} library.
This option sets flags for both the preprocessor and linker.

@item -mrecip
@itemx -mno-recip
@opindex mrecip
This option enables use of the reciprocal estimate and
reciprocal square root estimate instructions with additional
Newton-Raphson steps to increase precision instead of doing a divide or
square root and divide for floating-point arguments.  You should use
the @option{-ffast-math} option when using @option{-mrecip} (or at
least @option{-funsafe-math-optimizations},
@option{-finite-math-only}, @option{-freciprocal-math} and
@option{-fno-trapping-math}).  Note that while the throughput of the
sequence is generally higher than the throughput of the non-reciprocal
instruction, the precision of the sequence can be decreased by up to 2
ulp (i.e.@: the inverse of 1.0 equals 0.99999994) for reciprocal square
roots.

@item -mrecip=@var{opt}
@opindex mrecip=opt
This option controls which reciprocal estimate instructions
may be used.  @var{opt} is a comma-separated list of options, which may
be preceded by a @code{!} to invert the option:

@table @samp

@item all
Enable all estimate instructions.

@item default
Enable the default instructions, equivalent to @option{-mrecip}.

@item none
Disable all estimate instructions, equivalent to @option{-mno-recip}.

@item div
Enable the reciprocal approximation instructions for both
single and double precision.

@item divf
Enable the single-precision reciprocal approximation instructions.

@item divd
Enable the double-precision reciprocal approximation instructions.

@item rsqrt
Enable the reciprocal square root approximation instructions for both
single and double precision.

@item rsqrtf
Enable the single-precision reciprocal square root approximation instructions.

@item rsqrtd
Enable the double-precision reciprocal square root approximation instructions.

@end table

So, for example, @option{-mrecip=all,!rsqrtd} enables
all of the reciprocal estimate instructions, except for the
@code{FRSQRTE}, @code{XSRSQRTEDP}, and @code{XVRSQRTEDP} instructions
which handle the double-precision reciprocal square root calculations.

@item -mrecip-precision
@itemx -mno-recip-precision
@opindex mrecip-precision
Assume (do not assume) that the reciprocal estimate instructions
provide higher-precision estimates than is mandated by the PowerPC
ABI.  Selecting @option{-mcpu=power6}, @option{-mcpu=power7} or
@option{-mcpu=power8} automatically selects @option{-mrecip-precision}.
The double-precision square root estimate instructions are not generated by
default on low-precision machines, since they do not provide an
estimate that converges after three steps.

@item -mveclibabi=@var{type}
@opindex mveclibabi
Specifies the ABI type to use for vectorizing intrinsics using an
external library.  The only type supported at present is @samp{mass},
which specifies to use IBM's Mathematical Acceleration Subsystem
(MASS) libraries for vectorizing intrinsics using external libraries.
LLVM currently emits calls to @code{acosd2}, @code{acosf4},
@code{acoshd2}, @code{acoshf4}, @code{asind2}, @code{asinf4},
@code{asinhd2}, @code{asinhf4}, @code{atan2d2}, @code{atan2f4},
@code{atand2}, @code{atanf4}, @code{atanhd2}, @code{atanhf4},
@code{cbrtd2}, @code{cbrtf4}, @code{cosd2}, @code{cosf4},
@code{coshd2}, @code{coshf4}, @code{erfcd2}, @code{erfcf4},
@code{erfd2}, @code{erff4}, @code{exp2d2}, @code{exp2f4},
@code{expd2}, @code{expf4}, @code{expm1d2}, @code{expm1f4},
@code{hypotd2}, @code{hypotf4}, @code{lgammad2}, @code{lgammaf4},
@code{log10d2}, @code{log10f4}, @code{log1pd2}, @code{log1pf4},
@code{log2d2}, @code{log2f4}, @code{logd2}, @code{logf4},
@code{powd2}, @code{powf4}, @code{sind2}, @code{sinf4}, @code{sinhd2},
@code{sinhf4}, @code{sqrtd2}, @code{sqrtf4}, @code{tand2},
@code{tanf4}, @code{tanhd2}, and @code{tanhf4} when generating code
for power7.  Both @option{-ftree-vectorize} and
@option{-funsafe-math-optimizations} must also be enabled.  The MASS
libraries must be specified at link time.

@item -mfriz
@itemx -mno-friz
@opindex mfriz
Generate (do not generate) the @code{friz} instruction when the
@option{-funsafe-math-optimizations} option is used to optimize
rounding of floating-point values to 64-bit integer and back to floating
point.  The @code{friz} instruction does not return the same value if
the floating-point number is too large to fit in an integer.

@item -mpointers-to-nested-functions
@itemx -mno-pointers-to-nested-functions
@opindex mpointers-to-nested-functions
Generate (do not generate) code to load up the static chain register
(@code{r11}) when calling through a pointer on AIX and 64-bit Linux
systems where a function pointer points to a 3-word descriptor giving
the function address, TOC value to be loaded in register @code{r2}, and
static chain value to be loaded in register @code{r11}.  The
@option{-mpointers-to-nested-functions} is on by default.  You cannot
call through pointers to nested functions or pointers
to functions compiled in other languages that use the static chain if
you use the @option{-mno-pointers-to-nested-functions}.

@item -msave-toc-indirect
@itemx -mno-save-toc-indirect
@opindex msave-toc-indirect
Generate (do not generate) code to save the TOC value in the reserved
stack location in the function prologue if the function calls through
a pointer on AIX and 64-bit Linux systems.  If the TOC value is not
saved in the prologue, it is saved just before the call through the
pointer.  The @option{-mno-save-toc-indirect} option is the default.

@item -mcompat-align-parm
@itemx -mno-compat-align-parm
@opindex mcompat-align-parm
Generate (do not generate) code to pass structure parameters with a
maximum alignment of 64 bits, for compatibility with older versions
of GCC.

Older versions of GCC (prior to 4.9.0) incorrectly did not align a
structure parameter on a 128-bit boundary when that structure contained
a member requiring 128-bit alignment.  This is corrected in more
recent versions of GCC.  This option may be used to generate code
that is compatible with functions compiled with older versions of
GCC.

The @option{-mno-compat-align-parm} option is the default.
@end table

@node S/390 and zSeries Options
@subsection S/390 and zSeries Options
@cindex S/390 and zSeries Options

These are the @samp{-m} options defined for the S/390 and zSeries architecture.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -mhard-float
@itemx -msoft-float
@opindex mhard-float
@opindex msoft-float
Use (do not use) the hardware floating-point instructions and registers
for floating-point operations.  When @option{-msoft-float} is specified,
functions in @file{libgcc.a} are used to perform floating-point
operations.  When @option{-mhard-float} is specified, the compiler
generates IEEE floating-point instructions.  This is the default.

@item -mhard-dfp
@itemx -mno-hard-dfp
@opindex mhard-dfp
@opindex mno-hard-dfp
Use (do not use) the hardware decimal-floating-point instructions for
decimal-floating-point operations.  When @option{-mno-hard-dfp} is
specified, functions in @file{libgcc.a} are used to perform
decimal-floating-point operations.  When @option{-mhard-dfp} is
specified, the compiler generates decimal-floating-point hardware
instructions.  This is the default for @option{-march=z9-ec} or higher.

@item -mlong-double-64
@itemx -mlong-double-128
@opindex mlong-double-64
@opindex mlong-double-128
These switches control the size of @code{long double} type. A size
of 64 bits makes the @code{long double} type equivalent to the @code{double}
type. This is the default.

@item -mbackchain
@itemx -mno-backchain
@opindex mbackchain
@opindex mno-backchain
Store (do not store) the address of the caller's frame as backchain pointer
into the callee's stack frame.
A backchain may be needed to allow debugging using tools that do not understand
DWARF 2 call frame information.
When @option{-mno-packed-stack} is in effect, the backchain pointer is stored
at the bottom of the stack frame; when @option{-mpacked-stack} is in effect,
the backchain is placed into the topmost word of the 96/160 byte register
save area.

In general, code compiled with @option{-mbackchain} is call-compatible with
code compiled with @option{-mmo-backchain}; however, use of the backchain
for debugging purposes usually requires that the whole binary is built with
@option{-mbackchain}.  Note that the combination of @option{-mbackchain},
@option{-mpacked-stack} and @option{-mhard-float} is not supported.  In order
to build a linux kernel use @option{-msoft-float}.

The default is to not maintain the backchain.

@item -mpacked-stack
@itemx -mno-packed-stack
@opindex mpacked-stack
@opindex mno-packed-stack
Use (do not use) the packed stack layout.  When @option{-mno-packed-stack} is
specified, the compiler uses the all fields of the 96/160 byte register save
area only for their default purpose; unused fields still take up stack space.
When @option{-mpacked-stack} is specified, register save slots are densely
packed at the top of the register save area; unused space is reused for other
purposes, allowing for more efficient use of the available stack space.
However, when @option{-mbackchain} is also in effect, the topmost word of
the save area is always used to store the backchain, and the return address
register is always saved two words below the backchain.

As long as the stack frame backchain is not used, code generated with
@option{-mpacked-stack} is call-compatible with code generated with
@option{-mno-packed-stack}.  Note that some non-FSF releases of GCC 2.95 for
S/390 or zSeries generated code that uses the stack frame backchain at run
time, not just for debugging purposes.  Such code is not call-compatible
with code compiled with @option{-mpacked-stack}.  Also, note that the
combination of @option{-mbackchain},
@option{-mpacked-stack} and @option{-mhard-float} is not supported.  In order
to build a linux kernel use @option{-msoft-float}.

The default is to not use the packed stack layout.

@item -msmall-exec
@itemx -mno-small-exec
@opindex msmall-exec
@opindex mno-small-exec
Generate (or do not generate) code using the @code{bras} instruction
to do subroutine calls.
This only works reliably if the total executable size does not
exceed 64k.  The default is to use the @code{basr} instruction instead,
which does not have this limitation.

@item -m64
@itemx -m31
@opindex m64
@opindex m31
When @option{-m31} is specified, generate code compliant to the
GNU/Linux for S/390 ABI@.  When @option{-m64} is specified, generate
code compliant to the GNU/Linux for zSeries ABI@.  This allows LLVM in
particular to generate 64-bit instructions.  For the @samp{s390}
targets, the default is @option{-m31}, while the @samp{s390x}
targets default to @option{-m64}.

@item -mzarch
@itemx -mesa
@opindex mzarch
@opindex mesa
When @option{-mzarch} is specified, generate code using the
instructions available on z/Architecture.
When @option{-mesa} is specified, generate code using the
instructions available on ESA/390.  Note that @option{-mesa} is
not possible with @option{-m64}.
When generating code compliant to the GNU/Linux for S/390 ABI,
the default is @option{-mesa}.  When generating code compliant
to the GNU/Linux for zSeries ABI, the default is @option{-mzarch}.

@item -mmvcle
@itemx -mno-mvcle
@opindex mmvcle
@opindex mno-mvcle
Generate (or do not generate) code using the @code{mvcle} instruction
to perform block moves.  When @option{-mno-mvcle} is specified,
use a @code{mvc} loop instead.  This is the default unless optimizing for
size.

@item -mdebug
@itemx -mno-debug
@opindex mdebug
@opindex mno-debug
Print (or do not print) additional debug information when compiling.
The default is to not print debug information.

@item -march=@var{cpu-type}
@opindex march
Generate code that runs on @var{cpu-type}, which is the name of a system
representing a certain processor type.  Possible values for
@var{cpu-type} are @samp{g5}, @samp{g6}, @samp{z900}, @samp{z990},
@samp{z9-109}, @samp{z9-ec}, @samp{z10},  @samp{z196}, and @samp{zEC12}.
When generating code using the instructions available on z/Architecture,
the default is @option{-march=z900}.  Otherwise, the default is
@option{-march=g5}.

@item -mtune=@var{cpu-type}
@opindex mtune
Tune to @var{cpu-type} everything applicable about the generated code,
except for the ABI and the set of available instructions.
The list of @var{cpu-type} values is the same as for @option{-march}.
The default is the value used for @option{-march}.

@item -mtpf-trace
@itemx -mno-tpf-trace
@opindex mtpf-trace
@opindex mno-tpf-trace
Generate code that adds (does not add) in TPF OS specific branches to trace
routines in the operating system.  This option is off by default, even
when compiling for the TPF OS@.

@item -mfused-madd
@itemx -mno-fused-madd
@opindex mfused-madd
@opindex mno-fused-madd
Generate code that uses (does not use) the floating-point multiply and
accumulate instructions.  These instructions are generated by default if
hardware floating point is used.

@item -mwarn-framesize=@var{framesize}
@opindex mwarn-framesize
Emit a warning if the current function exceeds the given frame size.  Because
this is a compile-time check it doesn't need to be a real problem when the program
runs.  It is intended to identify functions that most probably cause
a stack overflow.  It is useful to be used in an environment with limited stack
size e.g.@: the linux kernel.

@item -mwarn-dynamicstack
@opindex mwarn-dynamicstack
Emit a warning if the function calls @code{alloca} or uses dynamically-sized
arrays.  This is generally a bad idea with a limited stack size.

@item -mstack-guard=@var{stack-guard}
@itemx -mstack-size=@var{stack-size}
@opindex mstack-guard
@opindex mstack-size
If these options are provided the S/390 back end emits additional instructions in
the function prologue that trigger a trap if the stack size is @var{stack-guard}
bytes above the @var{stack-size} (remember that the stack on S/390 grows downward).
If the @var{stack-guard} option is omitted the smallest power of 2 larger than
the frame size of the compiled function is chosen.
These options are intended to be used to help debugging stack overflow problems.
The additionally emitted code causes only little overhead and hence can also be
used in production-like systems without greater performance degradation.  The given
values have to be exact powers of 2 and @var{stack-size} has to be greater than
@var{stack-guard} without exceeding 64k.
In order to be efficient the extra code makes the assumption that the stack starts
at an address aligned to the value given by @var{stack-size}.
The @var{stack-guard} option can only be used in conjunction with @var{stack-size}.

@item -mhotpatch=@var{pre-halfwords},@var{post-halfwords}
@opindex mhotpatch
If the hotpatch option is enabled, a ``hot-patching'' function
prologue is generated for all functions in the compilation unit.
The funtion label is prepended with the given number of two-byte
NOP instructions (@var{pre-halfwords}, maximum 1000000).  After
the label, 2 * @var{post-halfwords} bytes are appended, using the
largest NOP like instructions the architecture allows (maximum
1000000).

If both arguments are zero, hotpatching is disabled.

This option can be overridden for individual functions with the
@code{hotpatch} attribute.
@end table

@node Solaris 2 Options
@subsection Solaris 2 Options
@cindex Solaris 2 options

These @samp{-m} options are supported on Solaris 2:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -mclear-hwcap
@opindex mclear-hwcap
@option{-mclear-hwcap} tells the compiler to remove the hardware
capabilities generated by the Solaris assembler.  This is only necessary
when object files use ISA extensions not supported by the current
machine, but check at runtime whether or not to use them.

@item -mimpure-text
@opindex mimpure-text
@option{-mimpure-text}, used in addition to @option{-shared}, tells
the compiler to not pass @option{-z text} to the linker when linking a
shared object.  Using this option, you can link position-dependent
code into a shared object.

@option{-mimpure-text} suppresses the ``relocations remain against
allocatable but non-writable sections'' linker error message.
However, the necessary relocations trigger copy-on-write, and the
shared object is not actually shared across processes.  Instead of
using @option{-mimpure-text}, you should compile all source code with
@option{-fpic} or @option{-fPIC}.

@end table

These switches are supported in addition to the above on Solaris 2:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -pthreads
@opindex pthreads
Add support for multithreading using the POSIX threads library.  This
option sets flags for both the preprocessor and linker.  This option does
not affect the thread safety of object code produced  by the compiler or
that of libraries supplied with it.

@item -pthread
@opindex pthread
This is a synonym for @option{-pthreads}.
@end table

@node SPARC Options
@subsection SPARC Options
@cindex SPARC options

These @samp{-m} options are supported on the SPARC:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -mno-app-regs
@itemx -mapp-regs
@opindex mno-app-regs
@opindex mapp-regs
Specify @option{-mapp-regs} to generate output using the global registers
2 through 4, which the SPARC SVR4 ABI reserves for applications.  Like the
global register 1, each global register 2 through 4 is then treated as an
allocable register that is clobbered by function calls.  This is the default.

To be fully SVR4 ABI-compliant at the cost of some performance loss,
specify @option{-mno-app-regs}.  You should compile libraries and system
software with this option.

@item -mflat
@itemx -mno-flat
@opindex mflat
@opindex mno-flat
With @option{-mflat}, the compiler does not generate save/restore instructions
and uses a ``flat'' or single register window model.  This model is compatible
with the regular register window model.  The local registers and the input
registers (0--5) are still treated as ``call-saved'' registers and are
saved on the stack as needed.

With @option{-mno-flat} (the default), the compiler generates save/restore
instructions (except for leaf functions).  This is the normal operating mode.

@item -mfpu
@itemx -mhard-float
@opindex mfpu
@opindex mhard-float
Generate output containing floating-point instructions.  This is the
default.

@item -mno-fpu
@itemx -msoft-float
@opindex mno-fpu
@opindex msoft-float
Generate output containing library calls for floating point.
@strong{Warning:} the requisite libraries are not available for all SPARC
targets.  Normally the facilities of the machine's usual C compiler are
used, but this cannot be done directly in cross-compilation.  You must make
your own arrangements to provide suitable library functions for
cross-compilation.  The embedded targets @samp{sparc-*-aout} and
@samp{sparclite-*-*} do provide software floating-point support.

@option{-msoft-float} changes the calling convention in the output file;
therefore, it is only useful if you compile @emph{all} of a program with
this option.  In particular, you need to compile @file{libgcc.a}, the
library that comes with LLVM, with @option{-msoft-float} in order for
this to work.

@item -mhard-quad-float
@opindex mhard-quad-float
Generate output containing quad-word (long double) floating-point
instructions.

@item -msoft-quad-float
@opindex msoft-quad-float
Generate output containing library calls for quad-word (long double)
floating-point instructions.  The functions called are those specified
in the SPARC ABI@.  This is the default.

As of this writing, there are no SPARC implementations that have hardware
support for the quad-word floating-point instructions.  They all invoke
a trap handler for one of these instructions, and then the trap handler
emulates the effect of the instruction.  Because of the trap handler overhead,
this is much slower than calling the ABI library routines.  Thus the
@option{-msoft-quad-float} option is the default.

@item -mno-unaligned-doubles
@itemx -munaligned-doubles
@opindex mno-unaligned-doubles
@opindex munaligned-doubles
Assume that doubles have 8-byte alignment.  This is the default.

With @option{-munaligned-doubles}, LLVM assumes that doubles have 8-byte
alignment only if they are contained in another type, or if they have an
absolute address.  Otherwise, it assumes they have 4-byte alignment.
Specifying this option avoids some rare compatibility problems with code
generated by other compilers.  It is not the default because it results
in a performance loss, especially for floating-point code.

@item -muser-mode
@itemx -mno-user-mode
@opindex muser-mode
@opindex mno-user-mode
Do not generate code that can only run in supervisor mode.  This is relevant
only for the @code{casa} instruction emitted for the LEON3 processor.  The
default is @option{-mno-user-mode}.

@item -mno-faster-structs
@itemx -mfaster-structs
@opindex mno-faster-structs
@opindex mfaster-structs
With @option{-mfaster-structs}, the compiler assumes that structures
should have 8-byte alignment.  This enables the use of pairs of
@code{ldd} and @code{std} instructions for copies in structure
assignment, in place of twice as many @code{ld} and @code{st} pairs.
However, the use of this changed alignment directly violates the SPARC
ABI@.  Thus, it's intended only for use on targets where the developer
acknowledges that their resulting code is not directly in line with
the rules of the ABI@.

@item -mcpu=@var{cpu_type}
@opindex mcpu
Set the instruction set, register set, and instruction scheduling parameters
for machine type @var{cpu_type}.  Supported values for @var{cpu_type} are
@samp{v7}, @samp{cypress}, @samp{v8}, @samp{supersparc}, @samp{hypersparc},
@samp{leon}, @samp{leon3}, @samp{leon3v7}, @samp{sparclite}, @samp{f930},
@samp{f934}, @samp{sparclite86x}, @samp{sparclet}, @samp{tsc701}, @samp{v9},
@samp{ultrasparc}, @samp{ultrasparc3}, @samp{niagara}, @samp{niagara2},
@samp{niagara3} and @samp{niagara4}.

Native Solaris and GNU/Linux toolchains also support the value @samp{native},
which selects the best architecture option for the host processor.
@option{-mcpu=native} has no effect if LLVM does not recognize
the processor.

Default instruction scheduling parameters are used for values that select
an architecture and not an implementation.  These are @samp{v7}, @samp{v8},
@samp{sparclite}, @samp{sparclet}, @samp{v9}.

Here is a list of each supported architecture and their supported
implementations.

@table @asis
@item v7
cypress, leon3v7

@item v8
supersparc, hypersparc, leon, leon3

@item sparclite
f930, f934, sparclite86x

@item sparclet
tsc701

@item v9
ultrasparc, ultrasparc3, niagara, niagara2, niagara3, niagara4
@end table

By default (unless configured otherwise), LLVM generates code for the V7
variant of the SPARC architecture.  With @option{-mcpu=cypress}, the compiler
additionally optimizes it for the Cypress CY7C602 chip, as used in the
SPARCStation/SPARCServer 3xx series.  This is also appropriate for the older
SPARCStation 1, 2, IPX etc.

With @option{-mcpu=v8}, LLVM generates code for the V8 variant of the SPARC
architecture.  The only difference from V7 code is that the compiler emits
the integer multiply and integer divide instructions which exist in SPARC-V8
but not in SPARC-V7.  With @option{-mcpu=supersparc}, the compiler additionally
optimizes it for the SuperSPARC chip, as used in the SPARCStation 10, 1000 and
2000 series.

With @option{-mcpu=sparclite}, LLVM generates code for the SPARClite variant of
the SPARC architecture.  This adds the integer multiply, integer divide step
and scan (@code{ffs}) instructions which exist in SPARClite but not in SPARC-V7.
With @option{-mcpu=f930}, the compiler additionally optimizes it for the
Fujitsu MB86930 chip, which is the original SPARClite, with no FPU@.  With
@option{-mcpu=f934}, the compiler additionally optimizes it for the Fujitsu
MB86934 chip, which is the more recent SPARClite with FPU@.

With @option{-mcpu=sparclet}, LLVM generates code for the SPARClet variant of
the SPARC architecture.  This adds the integer multiply, multiply/accumulate,
integer divide step and scan (@code{ffs}) instructions which exist in SPARClet
but not in SPARC-V7.  With @option{-mcpu=tsc701}, the compiler additionally
optimizes it for the TEMIC SPARClet chip.

With @option{-mcpu=v9}, LLVM generates code for the V9 variant of the SPARC
architecture.  This adds 64-bit integer and floating-point move instructions,
3 additional floating-point condition code registers and conditional move
instructions.  With @option{-mcpu=ultrasparc}, the compiler additionally
optimizes it for the Sun UltraSPARC I/II/IIi chips.  With
@option{-mcpu=ultrasparc3}, the compiler additionally optimizes it for the
Sun UltraSPARC III/III+/IIIi/IIIi+/IV/IV+ chips.  With
@option{-mcpu=niagara}, the compiler additionally optimizes it for
Sun UltraSPARC T1 chips.  With @option{-mcpu=niagara2}, the compiler
additionally optimizes it for Sun UltraSPARC T2 chips. With
@option{-mcpu=niagara3}, the compiler additionally optimizes it for Sun
UltraSPARC T3 chips.  With @option{-mcpu=niagara4}, the compiler
additionally optimizes it for Sun UltraSPARC T4 chips.

@item -mtune=@var{cpu_type}
@opindex mtune
Set the instruction scheduling parameters for machine type
@var{cpu_type}, but do not set the instruction set or register set that the
option @option{-mcpu=@var{cpu_type}} does.

The same values for @option{-mcpu=@var{cpu_type}} can be used for
@option{-mtune=@var{cpu_type}}, but the only useful values are those
that select a particular CPU implementation.  Those are @samp{cypress},
@samp{supersparc}, @samp{hypersparc}, @samp{leon}, @samp{leon3},
@samp{leon3v7}, @samp{f930}, @samp{f934}, @samp{sparclite86x}, @samp{tsc701},
@samp{ultrasparc}, @samp{ultrasparc3}, @samp{niagara}, @samp{niagara2},
@samp{niagara3} and @samp{niagara4}.  With native Solaris and GNU/Linux
toolchains, @samp{native} can also be used.

@item -mv8plus
@itemx -mno-v8plus
@opindex mv8plus
@opindex mno-v8plus
With @option{-mv8plus}, LLVM generates code for the SPARC-V8+ ABI@.  The
difference from the V8 ABI is that the global and out registers are
considered 64 bits wide.  This is enabled by default on Solaris in 32-bit
mode for all SPARC-V9 processors.

@item -mvis
@itemx -mno-vis
@opindex mvis
@opindex mno-vis
With @option{-mvis}, LLVM generates code that takes advantage of the UltraSPARC
Visual Instruction Set extensions.  The default is @option{-mno-vis}.

@item -mvis2
@itemx -mno-vis2
@opindex mvis2
@opindex mno-vis2
With @option{-mvis2}, LLVM generates code that takes advantage of
version 2.0 of the UltraSPARC Visual Instruction Set extensions.  The
default is @option{-mvis2} when targeting a cpu that supports such
instructions, such as UltraSPARC-III and later.  Setting @option{-mvis2}
also sets @option{-mvis}.

@item -mvis3
@itemx -mno-vis3
@opindex mvis3
@opindex mno-vis3
With @option{-mvis3}, LLVM generates code that takes advantage of
version 3.0 of the UltraSPARC Visual Instruction Set extensions.  The
default is @option{-mvis3} when targeting a cpu that supports such
instructions, such as niagara-3 and later.  Setting @option{-mvis3}
also sets @option{-mvis2} and @option{-mvis}.

@item -mcbcond
@itemx -mno-cbcond
@opindex mcbcond
@opindex mno-cbcond
With @option{-mcbcond}, LLVM generates code that takes advantage of
compare-and-branch instructions, as defined in the Sparc Architecture 2011.
The default is @option{-mcbcond} when targeting a cpu that supports such
instructions, such as niagara-4 and later.

@item -mpopc
@itemx -mno-popc
@opindex mpopc
@opindex mno-popc
With @option{-mpopc}, LLVM generates code that takes advantage of the UltraSPARC
population count instruction.  The default is @option{-mpopc}
when targeting a cpu that supports such instructions, such as Niagara-2 and
later.

@item -mfmaf
@itemx -mno-fmaf
@opindex mfmaf
@opindex mno-fmaf
With @option{-mfmaf}, LLVM generates code that takes advantage of the UltraSPARC
Fused Multiply-Add Floating-point extensions.  The default is @option{-mfmaf}
when targeting a cpu that supports such instructions, such as Niagara-3 and
later.

@item -mfix-at697f
@opindex mfix-at697f
Enable the documented workaround for the single erratum of the Atmel AT697F
processor (which corresponds to erratum #13 of the AT697E processor).

@item -mfix-ut699
@opindex mfix-ut699
Enable the documented workarounds for the floating-point errata and the data
cache nullify errata of the UT699 processor.
@end table

These @samp{-m} options are supported in addition to the above
on SPARC-V9 processors in 64-bit environments:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -m32
@itemx -m64
@opindex m32
@opindex m64
Generate code for a 32-bit or 64-bit environment.
The 32-bit environment sets int, long and pointer to 32 bits.
The 64-bit environment sets int to 32 bits and long and pointer
to 64 bits.

@item -mcmodel=@var{which}
@opindex mcmodel
Set the code model to one of

@table @samp
@item medlow
The Medium/Low code model: 64-bit addresses, programs
must be linked in the low 32 bits of memory.  Programs can be statically
or dynamically linked.

@item medmid
The Medium/Middle code model: 64-bit addresses, programs
must be linked in the low 44 bits of memory, the text and data segments must
be less than 2GB in size and the data segment must be located within 2GB of
the text segment.

@item medany
The Medium/Anywhere code model: 64-bit addresses, programs
may be linked anywhere in memory, the text and data segments must be less
than 2GB in size and the data segment must be located within 2GB of the
text segment.

@item embmedany
The Medium/Anywhere code model for embedded systems:
64-bit addresses, the text and data segments must be less than 2GB in
size, both starting anywhere in memory (determined at link time).  The
global register %g4 points to the base of the data segment.  Programs
are statically linked and PIC is not supported.
@end table

@item -mmemory-model=@var{mem-model}
@opindex mmemory-model
Set the memory model in force on the processor to one of

@table @samp
@item default
The default memory model for the processor and operating system.

@item rmo
Relaxed Memory Order

@item pso
Partial Store Order

@item tso
Total Store Order

@item sc
Sequential Consistency
@end table

These memory models are formally defined in Appendix D of the Sparc V9
architecture manual, as set in the processor's @code{PSTATE.MM} field.

@item -mstack-bias
@itemx -mno-stack-bias
@opindex mstack-bias
@opindex mno-stack-bias
With @option{-mstack-bias}, LLVM assumes that the stack pointer, and
frame pointer if present, are offset by @minus{}2047 which must be added back
when making stack frame references.  This is the default in 64-bit mode.
Otherwise, assume no such offset is present.
@end table

@node System V Options
@subsection Options for System V

These additional options are available on System V Release 4 for
compatibility with other compilers on those systems:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -G
@opindex G
Create a shared object.
It is recommended that @option{-symbolic} or @option{-shared} be used instead.

@item -Qy
@opindex Qy
Identify the versions of each tool used by the compiler, in a
@code{.ident} assembler directive in the output.

@item -Qn
@opindex Qn
Refrain from adding @code{.ident} directives to the output file (this is
the default).

@item -YP,@var{dirs}
@opindex YP
Search the directories @var{dirs}, and no others, for libraries
specified with @option{-l}.

@item -Ym,@var{dir}
@opindex Ym
Look in the directory @var{dir} to find the M4 preprocessor.
The assembler uses this option.
@c This is supposed to go with a -Yd for predefined M4 macro files, but
@c the generic assembler that comes with Solaris takes just -Ym.
@end table

@node VMS Options
@subsection VMS Options

These @samp{-m} options are defined for the VMS implementations:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -mvms-return-codes
@opindex mvms-return-codes
Return VMS condition codes from @code{main}. The default is to return POSIX-style
condition (e.g.@ error) codes.

@item -mdebug-main=@var{prefix}
@opindex mdebug-main=@var{prefix}
Flag the first routine whose name starts with @var{prefix} as the main
routine for the debugger.

@item -mmalloc64
@opindex mmalloc64
Default to 64-bit memory allocation routines.

@item -mpointer-size=@var{size}
@opindex mpointer-size=@var{size}
Set the default size of pointers. Possible options for @var{size} are
@samp{32} or @samp{short} for 32 bit pointers, @samp{64} or @samp{long}
for 64 bit pointers, and @samp{no} for supporting only 32 bit pointers.
The later option disables @code{pragma pointer_size}.
@end table

@node VxWorks Options
@subsection VxWorks Options
@cindex VxWorks Options

The options in this section are defined for all VxWorks targets.
Options specific to the target hardware are listed with the other
options for that target.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -mrtp
@opindex mrtp
LLVM can generate code for both VxWorks kernels and real time processes
(RTPs).  This option switches from the former to the latter.  It also
defines the preprocessor macro @code{__RTP__}.

@item -non-static
@opindex non-static
Link an RTP executable against shared libraries rather than static
libraries.  The options @option{-static} and @option{-shared} can
also be used for RTPs (@pxref{Link Options}); @option{-static}
is the default.

@item -Bstatic
@itemx -Bdynamic
@opindex Bstatic
@opindex Bdynamic
These options are passed down to the linker.  They are defined for
compatibility with Diab.

@item -Xbind-lazy
@opindex Xbind-lazy
Enable lazy binding of function calls.  This option is equivalent to
@option{-Wl,-z,now} and is defined for compatibility with Diab.

@item -Xbind-now
@opindex Xbind-now
Disable lazy binding of function calls.  This option is the default and
is defined for compatibility with Diab.
@end table

@node x86 Options
@subsection x86 Options
@cindex x86 Options

These @samp{-m} options are defined for the x86 family of computers.

@table @gcctabopt

@item -march=@var{cpu-type}
@opindex march
Generate instructions for the machine type @var{cpu-type}.  In contrast to
@option{-mtune=@var{cpu-type}}, which merely tunes the generated code
for the specified @var{cpu-type}, @option{-march=@var{cpu-type}} allows LLVM
to generate code that may not run at all on processors other than the one
indicated.  Specifying @option{-march=@var{cpu-type}} implies
@option{-mtune=@var{cpu-type}}.

The choices for @var{cpu-type} are:

@table @samp
@item native
This selects the CPU to generate code for at compilation time by determining
the processor type of the compiling machine.  Using @option{-march=native}
enables all instruction subsets supported by the local machine (hence
the result might not run on different machines).  Using @option{-mtune=native}
produces code optimized for the local machine under the constraints
of the selected instruction set.

@item i386
Original Intel i386 CPU@.

@item i486
Intel i486 CPU@.  (No scheduling is implemented for this chip.)

@item i586
@itemx pentium
Intel Pentium CPU with no MMX support.

@item pentium-mmx
Intel Pentium MMX CPU, based on Pentium core with MMX instruction set support.

@item pentiumpro
Intel Pentium Pro CPU@.

@item i686
When used with @option{-march}, the Pentium Pro
instruction set is used, so the code runs on all i686 family chips.
When used with @option{-mtune}, it has the same meaning as @samp{generic}.

@item pentium2
Intel Pentium II CPU, based on Pentium Pro core with MMX instruction set
support.

@item pentium3
@itemx pentium3m
Intel Pentium III CPU, based on Pentium Pro core with MMX and SSE instruction
set support.

@item pentium-m
Intel Pentium M; low-power version of Intel Pentium III CPU
with MMX, SSE and SSE2 instruction set support.  Used by Centrino notebooks.

@item pentium4
@itemx pentium4m
Intel Pentium 4 CPU with MMX, SSE and SSE2 instruction set support.

@item prescott
Improved version of Intel Pentium 4 CPU with MMX, SSE, SSE2 and SSE3 instruction
set support.

@item nocona
Improved version of Intel Pentium 4 CPU with 64-bit extensions, MMX, SSE,
SSE2 and SSE3 instruction set support.

@item core2
Intel Core 2 CPU with 64-bit extensions, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3 and SSSE3
instruction set support.

@item nehalem
Intel Nehalem CPU with 64-bit extensions, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSSE3,
SSE4.1, SSE4.2 and POPCNT instruction set support.

@item westmere
Intel Westmere CPU with 64-bit extensions, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSSE3,
SSE4.1, SSE4.2, POPCNT, AES and PCLMUL instruction set support.

@item sandybridge
Intel Sandy Bridge CPU with 64-bit extensions, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSSE3,
SSE4.1, SSE4.2, POPCNT, AVX, AES and PCLMUL instruction set support.

@item ivybridge
Intel Ivy Bridge CPU with 64-bit extensions, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSSE3,
SSE4.1, SSE4.2, POPCNT, AVX, AES, PCLMUL, FSGSBASE, RDRND and F16C
instruction set support.

@item haswell
Intel Haswell CPU with 64-bit extensions, MOVBE, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSSE3,
SSE4.1, SSE4.2, POPCNT, AVX, AVX2, AES, PCLMUL, FSGSBASE, RDRND, FMA,
BMI, BMI2 and F16C instruction set support.

@item broadwell
Intel Broadwell CPU with 64-bit extensions, MOVBE, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSSE3,
SSE4.1, SSE4.2, POPCNT, AVX, AVX2, AES, PCLMUL, FSGSBASE, RDRND, FMA,
BMI, BMI2, F16C, RDSEED, ADCX and PREFETCHW instruction set support.

@item bonnell
Intel Bonnell CPU with 64-bit extensions, MOVBE, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3 and SSSE3
instruction set support.

@item silvermont
Intel Silvermont CPU with 64-bit extensions, MOVBE, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSSE3,
SSE4.1, SSE4.2, POPCNT, AES, PCLMUL and RDRND instruction set support.

@item k6
AMD K6 CPU with MMX instruction set support.

@item k6-2
@itemx k6-3
Improved versions of AMD K6 CPU with MMX and 3DNow!@: instruction set support.

@item athlon
@itemx athlon-tbird
AMD Athlon CPU with MMX, 3dNOW!, enhanced 3DNow!@: and SSE prefetch instructions
support.

@item athlon-4
@itemx athlon-xp
@itemx athlon-mp
Improved AMD Athlon CPU with MMX, 3DNow!, enhanced 3DNow!@: and full SSE
instruction set support.

@item k8
@itemx opteron
@itemx athlon64
@itemx athlon-fx
Processors based on the AMD K8 core with x86-64 instruction set support,
including the AMD Opteron, Athlon 64, and Athlon 64 FX processors.
(This supersets MMX, SSE, SSE2, 3DNow!, enhanced 3DNow!@: and 64-bit
instruction set extensions.)

@item k8-sse3
@itemx opteron-sse3
@itemx athlon64-sse3
Improved versions of AMD K8 cores with SSE3 instruction set support.

@item amdfam10
@itemx barcelona
CPUs based on AMD Family 10h cores with x86-64 instruction set support.  (This
supersets MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSE4A, 3DNow!, enhanced 3DNow!, ABM and 64-bit
instruction set extensions.)

@item bdver1
CPUs based on AMD Family 15h cores with x86-64 instruction set support.  (This
supersets FMA4, AVX, XOP, LWP, AES, PCL_MUL, CX16, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSE4A,
SSSE3, SSE4.1, SSE4.2, ABM and 64-bit instruction set extensions.)
@item bdver2
AMD Family 15h core based CPUs with x86-64 instruction set support.  (This
supersets BMI, TBM, F16C, FMA, FMA4, AVX, XOP, LWP, AES, PCL_MUL, CX16, MMX,
SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSE4A, SSSE3, SSE4.1, SSE4.2, ABM and 64-bit instruction set
extensions.)
@item bdver3
AMD Family 15h core based CPUs with x86-64 instruction set support.  (This
supersets BMI, TBM, F16C, FMA, FMA4, FSGSBASE, AVX, XOP, LWP, AES,
PCL_MUL, CX16, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSE4A, SSSE3, SSE4.1, SSE4.2, ABM and
64-bit instruction set extensions.
@item bdver4
AMD Family 15h core based CPUs with x86-64 instruction set support.  (This
supersets BMI, BMI2, TBM, F16C, FMA, FMA4, FSGSBASE, AVX, AVX2, XOP, LWP,
AES, PCL_MUL, CX16, MOVBE, MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSE4A, SSSE3, SSE4.1,
SSE4.2, ABM and 64-bit instruction set extensions.

@item btver1
CPUs based on AMD Family 14h cores with x86-64 instruction set support.  (This
supersets MMX, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, SSSE3, SSE4A, CX16, ABM and 64-bit
instruction set extensions.)

@item btver2
CPUs based on AMD Family 16h cores with x86-64 instruction set support. This
includes MOVBE, F16C, BMI, AVX, PCL_MUL, AES, SSE4.2, SSE4.1, CX16, ABM,
SSE4A, SSSE3, SSE3, SSE2, SSE, MMX and 64-bit instruction set extensions.

@item winchip-c6
IDT WinChip C6 CPU, dealt in same way as i486 with additional MMX instruction
set support.

@item winchip2
IDT WinChip 2 CPU, dealt in same way as i486 with additional MMX and 3DNow!@:
instruction set support.

@item c3
VIA C3 CPU with MMX and 3DNow!@: instruction set support.  (No scheduling is
implemented for this chip.)

@item c3-2
VIA C3-2 (Nehemiah/C5XL) CPU with MMX and SSE instruction set support.
(No scheduling is
implemented for this chip.)

@item geode
AMD Geode embedded processor with MMX and 3DNow!@: instruction set support.
@end table

@item -mtune=@var{cpu-type}
@opindex mtune
Tune to @var{cpu-type} everything applicable about the generated code, except
for the ABI and the set of available instructions.
While picking a specific @var{cpu-type} schedules things appropriately
for that particular chip, the compiler does not generate any code that
cannot run on the default machine type unless you use a
@option{-march=@var{cpu-type}} option.
For example, if LLVM is configured for i686-pc-linux-gnu
then @option{-mtune=pentium4} generates code that is tuned for Pentium 4
but still runs on i686 machines.

The choices for @var{cpu-type} are the same as for @option{-march}.
In addition, @option{-mtune} supports 2 extra choices for @var{cpu-type}:

@table @samp
@item generic
Produce code optimized for the most common IA32/@/AMD64/@/EM64T processors.
If you know the CPU on which your code will run, then you should use
the corresponding @option{-mtune} or @option{-march} option instead of
@option{-mtune=generic}.  But, if you do not know exactly what CPU users
of your application will have, then you should use this option.

As new processors are deployed in the marketplace, the behavior of this
option will change.  Therefore, if you upgrade to a newer version of
LLVM, code generation controlled by this option will change to reflect
the processors
that are most common at the time that version of LLVM is released.

There is no @option{-march=generic} option because @option{-march}
indicates the instruction set the compiler can use, and there is no
generic instruction set applicable to all processors.  In contrast,
@option{-mtune} indicates the processor (or, in this case, collection of
processors) for which the code is optimized.

@item intel
Produce code optimized for the most current Intel processors, which are
Haswell and Silvermont for this version of LLVM.  If you know the CPU
on which your code will run, then you should use the corresponding
@option{-mtune} or @option{-march} option instead of @option{-mtune=intel}.
But, if you want your application performs better on both Haswell and
Silvermont, then you should use this option.

As new Intel processors are deployed in the marketplace, the behavior of
this option will change.  Therefore, if you upgrade to a newer version of
LLVM, code generation controlled by this option will change to reflect
the most current Intel processors at the time that version of LLVM is
released.

There is no @option{-march=intel} option because @option{-march} indicates
the instruction set the compiler can use, and there is no common
instruction set applicable to all processors.  In contrast,
@option{-mtune} indicates the processor (or, in this case, collection of
processors) for which the code is optimized.
@end table

@item -mcpu=@var{cpu-type}
@opindex mcpu
A deprecated synonym for @option{-mtune}.

@item -mfpmath=@var{unit}
@opindex mfpmath
Generate floating-point arithmetic for selected unit @var{unit}.  The choices
for @var{unit} are:

@table @samp
@item 387
Use the standard 387 floating-point coprocessor present on the majority of chips and
emulated otherwise.  Code compiled with this option runs almost everywhere.
The temporary results are computed in 80-bit precision instead of the precision
specified by the type, resulting in slightly different results compared to most
of other chips.  See @option{-ffloat-store} for more detailed description.

This is the default choice for x86-32 targets.

@item sse
Use scalar floating-point instructions present in the SSE instruction set.
This instruction set is supported by Pentium III and newer chips,
and in the AMD line
by Athlon-4, Athlon XP and Athlon MP chips.  The earlier version of the SSE
instruction set supports only single-precision arithmetic, thus the double and
extended-precision arithmetic are still done using 387.  A later version, present
only in Pentium 4 and AMD x86-64 chips, supports double-precision
arithmetic too.

For the x86-32 compiler, you must use @option{-march=@var{cpu-type}}, @option{-msse}
or @option{-msse2} switches to enable SSE extensions and make this option
effective.  For the x86-64 compiler, these extensions are enabled by default.

The resulting code should be considerably faster in the majority of cases and avoid
the numerical instability problems of 387 code, but may break some existing
code that expects temporaries to be 80 bits.

This is the default choice for the x86-64 compiler.

@item sse,387
@itemx sse+387
@itemx both
Attempt to utilize both instruction sets at once.  This effectively doubles the
amount of available registers, and on chips with separate execution units for
387 and SSE the execution resources too.  Use this option with care, as it is
still experimental, because the LLVM register allocator does not model separate
functional units well, resulting in unstable performance.
@end table

@item -masm=@var{dialect}
@opindex masm=@var{dialect}
Output assembly instructions using selected @var{dialect}.  Also affects
which dialect is used for basic @code{asm} (@pxref{Basic Asm}) and
extended @code{asm} (@pxref{Extended Asm}). Supported choices (in dialect
order) are @samp{att} or @samp{intel}. The default is @samp{att}. Darwin does
not support @samp{intel}.

@item -mieee-fp
@itemx -mno-ieee-fp
@opindex mieee-fp
@opindex mno-ieee-fp
Control whether or not the compiler uses IEEE floating-point
comparisons.  These correctly handle the case where the result of a
comparison is unordered.

@item -msoft-float
@opindex msoft-float
Generate output containing library calls for floating point.

@strong{Warning:} the requisite libraries are not part of LLVM@.
Normally the facilities of the machine's usual C compiler are used, but
this can't be done directly in cross-compilation.  You must make your
own arrangements to provide suitable library functions for
cross-compilation.

On machines where a function returns floating-point results in the 80387
register stack, some floating-point opcodes may be emitted even if
@option{-msoft-float} is used.

@item -mno-fp-ret-in-387
@opindex mno-fp-ret-in-387
Do not use the FPU registers for return values of functions.

The usual calling convention has functions return values of types
@code{float} and @code{double} in an FPU register, even if there
is no FPU@.  The idea is that the operating system should emulate
an FPU@.

The option @option{-mno-fp-ret-in-387} causes such values to be returned
in ordinary CPU registers instead.

@item -mno-fancy-math-387
@opindex mno-fancy-math-387
Some 387 emulators do not support the @code{sin}, @code{cos} and
@code{sqrt} instructions for the 387.  Specify this option to avoid
generating those instructions.  This option is the default on FreeBSD,
OpenBSD and NetBSD@.  This option is overridden when @option{-march}
indicates that the target CPU always has an FPU and so the
instruction does not need emulation.  These
instructions are not generated unless you also use the
@option{-funsafe-math-optimizations} switch.

@item -malign-double
@itemx -mno-align-double
@opindex malign-double
@opindex mno-align-double
Control whether LLVM aligns @code{double}, @code{long double}, and
@code{long long} variables on a two-word boundary or a one-word
boundary.  Aligning @code{double} variables on a two-word boundary
produces code that runs somewhat faster on a Pentium at the
expense of more memory.

On x86-64, @option{-malign-double} is enabled by default.

@strong{Warning:} if you use the @option{-malign-double} switch,
structures containing the above types are aligned differently than
the published application binary interface specifications for the x86-32
and are not binary compatible with structures in code compiled
without that switch.

@item -m96bit-long-double
@itemx -m128bit-long-double
@opindex m96bit-long-double
@opindex m128bit-long-double
These switches control the size of @code{long double} type.  The x86-32
application binary interface specifies the size to be 96 bits,
so @option{-m96bit-long-double} is the default in 32-bit mode.

Modern architectures (Pentium and newer) prefer @code{long double}
to be aligned to an 8- or 16-byte boundary.  In arrays or structures
conforming to the ABI, this is not possible.  So specifying
@option{-m128bit-long-double} aligns @code{long double}
to a 16-byte boundary by padding the @code{long double} with an additional
32-bit zero.

In the x86-64 compiler, @option{-m128bit-long-double} is the default choice as
its ABI specifies that @code{long double} is aligned on 16-byte boundary.

Notice that neither of these options enable any extra precision over the x87
standard of 80 bits for a @code{long double}.

@strong{Warning:} if you override the default value for your target ABI, this
changes the size of
structures and arrays containing @code{long double} variables,
as well as modifying the function calling convention for functions taking
@code{long double}.  Hence they are not binary-compatible
with code compiled without that switch.

@item -mlong-double-64
@itemx -mlong-double-80
@itemx -mlong-double-128
@opindex mlong-double-64
@opindex mlong-double-80
@opindex mlong-double-128
These switches control the size of @code{long double} type. A size
of 64 bits makes the @code{long double} type equivalent to the @code{double}
type. This is the default for 32-bit Bionic C library.  A size
of 128 bits makes the @code{long double} type equivalent to the
@code{__float128} type. This is the default for 64-bit Bionic C library.

@strong{Warning:} if you override the default value for your target ABI, this
changes the size of
structures and arrays containing @code{long double} variables,
as well as modifying the function calling convention for functions taking
@code{long double}.  Hence they are not binary-compatible
with code compiled without that switch.

@item -malign-data=@var{type}
@opindex malign-data
Control how LLVM aligns variables.  Supported values for @var{type} are
@samp{compat} uses increased alignment value compatible uses GCC 4.8
and earlier, @samp{abi} uses alignment value as specified by the
psABI, and @samp{cacheline} uses increased alignment value to match
the cache line size.  @samp{compat} is the default.

@item -mlarge-data-threshold=@var{threshold}
@opindex mlarge-data-threshold
When @option{-mcmodel=medium} is specified, data objects larger than
@var{threshold} are placed in the large data section.  This value must be the
same across all objects linked into the binary, and defaults to 65535.

@item -mrtd
@opindex mrtd
Use a different function-calling convention, in which functions that
take a fixed number of arguments return with the @code{ret @var{num}}
instruction, which pops their arguments while returning.  This saves one
instruction in the caller since there is no need to pop the arguments
there.

You can specify that an individual function is called with this calling
sequence with the function attribute @code{stdcall}.  You can also
override the @option{-mrtd} option by using the function attribute
@code{cdecl}.  @xref{Function Attributes}.

@strong{Warning:} this calling convention is incompatible with the one
normally used on Unix, so you cannot use it if you need to call
libraries compiled with the Unix compiler.

Also, you must provide function prototypes for all functions that
take variable numbers of arguments (including @code{printf});
otherwise incorrect code is generated for calls to those
functions.

In addition, seriously incorrect code results if you call a
function with too many arguments.  (Normally, extra arguments are
harmlessly ignored.)

@item -mregparm=@var{num}
@opindex mregparm
Control how many registers are used to pass integer arguments.  By
default, no registers are used to pass arguments, and at most 3
registers can be used.  You can control this behavior for a specific
function by using the function attribute @code{regparm}.
@xref{Function Attributes}.

@strong{Warning:} if you use this switch, and
@var{num} is nonzero, then you must build all modules with the same
value, including any libraries.  This includes the system libraries and
startup modules.

@item -msseregparm
@opindex msseregparm
Use SSE register passing conventions for float and double arguments
and return values.  You can control this behavior for a specific
function by using the function attribute @code{sseregparm}.
@xref{Function Attributes}.

@strong{Warning:} if you use this switch then you must build all
modules with the same value, including any libraries.  This includes
the system libraries and startup modules.

@item -mvect8-ret-in-mem
@opindex mvect8-ret-in-mem
Return 8-byte vectors in memory instead of MMX registers.  This is the
default on Solaris@tie{}8 and 9 and VxWorks to match the ABI of the Sun
Studio compilers until version 12.  Later compiler versions (starting
with Studio 12 Update@tie{}1) follow the ABI used by other x86 targets, which
is the default on Solaris@tie{}10 and later.  @emph{Only} use this option if
you need to remain compatible with existing code produced by those
previous compiler versions or older versions of LLVM@.

@item -mpc32
@itemx -mpc64
@itemx -mpc80
@opindex mpc32
@opindex mpc64
@opindex mpc80

Set 80387 floating-point precision to 32, 64 or 80 bits.  When @option{-mpc32}
is specified, the significands of results of floating-point operations are
rounded to 24 bits (single precision); @option{-mpc64} rounds the
significands of results of floating-point operations to 53 bits (double
precision) and @option{-mpc80} rounds the significands of results of
floating-point operations to 64 bits (extended double precision), which is
the default.  When this option is used, floating-point operations in higher
precisions are not available to the programmer without setting the FPU
control word explicitly.

Setting the rounding of floating-point operations to less than the default
80 bits can speed some programs by 2% or more.  Note that some mathematical
libraries assume that extended-precision (80-bit) floating-point operations
are enabled by default; routines in such libraries could suffer significant
loss of accuracy, typically through so-called ``catastrophic cancellation'',
when this option is used to set the precision to less than extended precision.

@item -mstackrealign
@opindex mstackrealign
Realign the stack at entry.  On the x86, the @option{-mstackrealign}
option generates an alternate prologue and epilogue that realigns the
run-time stack if necessary.  This supports mixing legacy codes that keep
4-byte stack alignment with modern codes that keep 16-byte stack alignment for
SSE compatibility.  See also the attribute @code{force_align_arg_pointer},
applicable to individual functions.

@item -mpreferred-stack-boundary=@var{num}
@opindex mpreferred-stack-boundary
Attempt to keep the stack boundary aligned to a 2 raised to @var{num}
byte boundary.  If @option{-mpreferred-stack-boundary} is not specified,
the default is 4 (16 bytes or 128 bits).

@strong{Warning:} When generating code for the x86-64 architecture with
SSE extensions disabled, @option{-mpreferred-stack-boundary=3} can be
used to keep the stack boundary aligned to 8 byte boundary.  Since
x86-64 ABI require 16 byte stack alignment, this is ABI incompatible and
intended to be used in controlled environment where stack space is
important limitation.  This option leads to wrong code when functions
compiled with 16 byte stack alignment (such as functions from a standard
library) are called with misaligned stack.  In this case, SSE
instructions may lead to misaligned memory access traps.  In addition,
variable arguments are handled incorrectly for 16 byte aligned
objects (including x87 long double and __int128), leading to wrong
results.  You must build all modules with
@option{-mpreferred-stack-boundary=3}, including any libraries.  This
includes the system libraries and startup modules.

@item -mincoming-stack-boundary=@var{num}
@opindex mincoming-stack-boundary
Assume the incoming stack is aligned to a 2 raised to @var{num} byte
boundary.  If @option{-mincoming-stack-boundary} is not specified,
the one specified by @option{-mpreferred-stack-boundary} is used.

On Pentium and Pentium Pro, @code{double} and @code{long double} values
should be aligned to an 8-byte boundary (see @option{-malign-double}) or
suffer significant run time performance penalties.  On Pentium III, the
Streaming SIMD Extension (SSE) data type @code{__m128} may not work
properly if it is not 16-byte aligned.

To ensure proper alignment of this values on the stack, the stack boundary
must be as aligned as that required by any value stored on the stack.
Further, every function must be generated such that it keeps the stack
aligned.  Thus calling a function compiled with a higher preferred
stack boundary from a function compiled with a lower preferred stack
boundary most likely misaligns the stack.  It is recommended that
libraries that use callbacks always use the default setting.

This extra alignment does consume extra stack space, and generally
increases code size.  Code that is sensitive to stack space usage, such
as embedded systems and operating system kernels, may want to reduce the
preferred alignment to @option{-mpreferred-stack-boundary=2}.

@need 200
@item -mmmx
@opindex mmmx
@need 200
@itemx -msse
@opindex msse
@need 200
@itemx -msse2
@need 200
@itemx -msse3
@need 200
@itemx -mssse3
@need 200
@itemx -msse4
@need 200
@itemx -msse4a
@need 200
@itemx -msse4.1
@need 200
@itemx -msse4.2
@need 200
@itemx -mavx
@opindex mavx
@need 200
@itemx -mavx2
@need 200
@itemx -mavx512f
@need 200
@itemx -mavx512pf
@need 200
@itemx -mavx512er
@need 200
@itemx -mavx512cd
@need 200
@itemx -msha
@opindex msha
@need 200
@itemx -maes
@opindex maes
@need 200
@itemx -mpclmul
@opindex mpclmul
@need 200
@itemx -mclfushopt
@opindex mclfushopt
@need 200
@itemx -mfsgsbase
@opindex mfsgsbase
@need 200
@itemx -mrdrnd
@opindex mrdrnd
@need 200
@itemx -mf16c
@opindex mf16c
@need 200
@itemx -mfma
@opindex mfma
@need 200
@itemx -mfma4
@need 200
@itemx -mno-fma4
@need 200
@itemx -mprefetchwt1
@opindex mprefetchwt1
@need 200
@itemx -mxop
@opindex mxop
@need 200
@itemx -mlwp
@opindex mlwp
@need 200
@itemx -m3dnow
@opindex m3dnow
@need 200
@itemx -mpopcnt
@opindex mpopcnt
@need 200
@itemx -mabm
@opindex mabm
@need 200
@itemx -mbmi
@opindex mbmi
@need 200
@itemx -mbmi2
@need 200
@itemx -mlzcnt
@opindex mlzcnt
@need 200
@itemx -mfxsr
@opindex mfxsr
@need 200
@itemx -mxsave
@opindex mxsave
@need 200
@itemx -mxsaveopt
@opindex mxsaveopt
@need 200
@itemx -mxsavec
@opindex mxsavec
@need 200
@itemx -mxsaves
@opindex mxsaves
@need 200
@itemx -mrtm
@opindex mrtm
@need 200
@itemx -mtbm
@opindex mtbm
@need 200
@itemx -mmpx
@opindex mmpx
These switches enable the use of instructions in the MMX, SSE,
SSE2, SSE3, SSSE3, SSE4.1, AVX, AVX2, AVX512F, AVX512PF, AVX512ER, AVX512CD,
SHA, AES, PCLMUL, FSGSBASE, RDRND, F16C, FMA, SSE4A, FMA4, XOP, LWP, ABM,
BMI, BMI2, FXSR, XSAVE, XSAVEOPT, LZCNT, RTM, MPX or 3DNow!@:
extended instruction sets.  Each has a corresponding @option{-mno-} option
to disable use of these instructions.

These extensions are also available as built-in functions: see
@ref{x86 Built-in Functions}, for details of the functions enabled and
disabled by these switches.

To generate SSE/SSE2 instructions automatically from floating-point
code (as opposed to 387 instructions), see @option{-mfpmath=sse}.

LLVM depresses SSEx instructions when @option{-mavx} is used. Instead, it
generates new AVX instructions or AVX equivalence for all SSEx instructions
when needed.

These options enable LLVM to use these extended instructions in
generated code, even without @option{-mfpmath=sse}.  Applications that
perform run-time CPU detection must compile separate files for each
supported architecture, using the appropriate flags.  In particular,
the file containing the CPU detection code should be compiled without
these options.

@item -mdump-tune-features
@opindex mdump-tune-features
This option instructs LLVM to dump the names of the x86 performance
tuning features and default settings. The names can be used in
@option{-mtune-ctrl=@var{feature-list}}.

@item -mtune-ctrl=@var{feature-list}
@opindex mtune-ctrl=@var{feature-list}
This option is used to do fine grain control of x86 code generation features.
@var{feature-list} is a comma separated list of @var{feature} names. See also
@option{-mdump-tune-features}. When specified, the @var{feature} is turned
on if it is not preceded with @samp{^}, otherwise, it is turned off.
@option{-mtune-ctrl=@var{feature-list}} is intended to be used by LLVM
developers. Using it may lead to code paths not covered by testing and can
potentially result in compiler ICEs or runtime errors.

@item -mno-default
@opindex mno-default
This option instructs LLVM to turn off all tunable features. See also
@option{-mtune-ctrl=@var{feature-list}} and @option{-mdump-tune-features}.

@item -mcld
@opindex mcld
This option instructs LLVM to emit a @code{cld} instruction in the prologue
of functions that use string instructions.  String instructions depend on
the DF flag to select between autoincrement or autodecrement mode.  While the
ABI specifies the DF flag to be cleared on function entry, some operating
systems violate this specification by not clearing the DF flag in their
exception dispatchers.  The exception handler can be invoked with the DF flag
set, which leads to wrong direction mode when string instructions are used.
This option can be enabled by default on 32-bit x86 targets by configuring
LLVM with the @option{--enable-cld} configure option.  Generation of @code{cld}
instructions can be suppressed with the @option{-mno-cld} compiler option
in this case.

@item -mvzeroupper
@opindex mvzeroupper
This option instructs LLVM to emit a @code{vzeroupper} instruction
before a transfer of control flow out of the function to minimize
the AVX to SSE transition penalty as well as remove unnecessary @code{zeroupper}
intrinsics.

@item -mprefer-avx128
@opindex mprefer-avx128
This option instructs LLVM to use 128-bit AVX instructions instead of
256-bit AVX instructions in the auto-vectorizer.

@item -mcx16
@opindex mcx16
This option enables LLVM to generate @code{CMPXCHG16B} instructions.
@code{CMPXCHG16B} allows for atomic operations on 128-bit double quadword
(or oword) data types.
This is useful for high-resolution counters that can be updated
by multiple processors (or cores).  This instruction is generated as part of
atomic built-in functions: see @ref{__sync Builtins} or
@ref{__atomic Builtins} for details.

@item -msahf
@opindex msahf
This option enables generation of @code{SAHF} instructions in 64-bit code.
Early Intel Pentium 4 CPUs with Intel 64 support,
prior to the introduction of Pentium 4 G1 step in December 2005,
lacked the @code{LAHF} and @code{SAHF} instructions
which are supported by AMD64.
These are load and store instructions, respectively, for certain status flags.
In 64-bit mode, the @code{SAHF} instruction is used to optimize @code{fmod},
@code{drem}, and @code{remainder} built-in functions;
see @ref{Other Builtins} for details.

@item -mmovbe
@opindex mmovbe
This option enables use of the @code{movbe} instruction to implement
@code{__builtin_bswap32} and @code{__builtin_bswap64}.

@item -mcrc32
@opindex mcrc32
This option enables built-in functions @code{__builtin_ia32_crc32qi},
@code{__builtin_ia32_crc32hi}, @code{__builtin_ia32_crc32si} and
@code{__builtin_ia32_crc32di} to generate the @code{crc32} machine instruction.

@item -mrecip
@opindex mrecip
This option enables use of @code{RCPSS} and @code{RSQRTSS} instructions
(and their vectorized variants @code{RCPPS} and @code{RSQRTPS})
with an additional Newton-Raphson step
to increase precision instead of @code{DIVSS} and @code{SQRTSS}
(and their vectorized
variants) for single-precision floating-point arguments.  These instructions
are generated only when @option{-funsafe-math-optimizations} is enabled
together with @option{-finite-math-only} and @option{-fno-trapping-math}.
Note that while the throughput of the sequence is higher than the throughput
of the non-reciprocal instruction, the precision of the sequence can be
decreased by up to 2 ulp (i.e. the inverse of 1.0 equals 0.99999994).

Note that LLVM implements @code{1.0f/sqrtf(@var{x})} in terms of @code{RSQRTSS}
(or @code{RSQRTPS}) already with @option{-ffast-math} (or the above option
combination), and doesn't need @option{-mrecip}.

Also note that LLVM emits the above sequence with additional Newton-Raphson step
for vectorized single-float division and vectorized @code{sqrtf(@var{x})}
already with @option{-ffast-math} (or the above option combination), and
doesn't need @option{-mrecip}.

@item -mrecip=@var{opt}
@opindex mrecip=opt
This option controls which reciprocal estimate instructions
may be used.  @var{opt} is a comma-separated list of options, which may
be preceded by a @samp{!} to invert the option:

@table @samp
@item all
Enable all estimate instructions.

@item default
Enable the default instructions, equivalent to @option{-mrecip}.

@item none
Disable all estimate instructions, equivalent to @option{-mno-recip}.

@item div
Enable the approximation for scalar division.

@item vec-div
Enable the approximation for vectorized division.

@item sqrt
Enable the approximation for scalar square root.

@item vec-sqrt
Enable the approximation for vectorized square root.
@end table

So, for example, @option{-mrecip=all,!sqrt} enables
all of the reciprocal approximations, except for square root.

@item -mveclibabi=@var{type}
@opindex mveclibabi
Specifies the ABI type to use for vectorizing intrinsics using an
external library.  Supported values for @var{type} are @samp{svml}
for the Intel short
vector math library and @samp{acml} for the AMD math core library.
To use this option, both @option{-ftree-vectorize} and
@option{-funsafe-math-optimizations} have to be enabled, and an SVML or ACML
ABI-compatible library must be specified at link time.

LLVM currently emits calls to @code{vmldExp2},
@code{vmldLn2}, @code{vmldLog102}, @code{vmldLog102}, @code{vmldPow2},
@code{vmldTanh2}, @code{vmldTan2}, @code{vmldAtan2}, @code{vmldAtanh2},
@code{vmldCbrt2}, @code{vmldSinh2}, @code{vmldSin2}, @code{vmldAsinh2},
@code{vmldAsin2}, @code{vmldCosh2}, @code{vmldCos2}, @code{vmldAcosh2},
@code{vmldAcos2}, @code{vmlsExp4}, @code{vmlsLn4}, @code{vmlsLog104},
@code{vmlsLog104}, @code{vmlsPow4}, @code{vmlsTanh4}, @code{vmlsTan4},
@code{vmlsAtan4}, @code{vmlsAtanh4}, @code{vmlsCbrt4}, @code{vmlsSinh4},
@code{vmlsSin4}, @code{vmlsAsinh4}, @code{vmlsAsin4}, @code{vmlsCosh4},
@code{vmlsCos4}, @code{vmlsAcosh4} and @code{vmlsAcos4} for corresponding
function type when @option{-mveclibabi=svml} is used, and @code{__vrd2_sin},
@code{__vrd2_cos}, @code{__vrd2_exp}, @code{__vrd2_log}, @code{__vrd2_log2},
@code{__vrd2_log10}, @code{__vrs4_sinf}, @code{__vrs4_cosf},
@code{__vrs4_expf}, @code{__vrs4_logf}, @code{__vrs4_log2f},
@code{__vrs4_log10f} and @code{__vrs4_powf} for the corresponding function type
when @option{-mveclibabi=acml} is used.

@item -mabi=@var{name}
@opindex mabi
Generate code for the specified calling convention.  Permissible values
are @samp{sysv} for the ABI used on GNU/Linux and other systems, and
@samp{ms} for the Microsoft ABI.  The default is to use the Microsoft
ABI when targeting Microsoft Windows and the SysV ABI on all other systems.
You can control this behavior for specific functions by
using the function attributes @code{ms_abi} and @code{sysv_abi}.
@xref{Function Attributes}.

@item -mtls-dialect=@var{type}
@opindex mtls-dialect
Generate code to access thread-local storage using the @samp{gnu} or
@samp{gnu2} conventions.  @samp{gnu} is the conservative default;
@samp{gnu2} is more efficient, but it may add compile- and run-time
requirements that cannot be satisfied on all systems.

@item -mpush-args
@itemx -mno-push-args
@opindex mpush-args
@opindex mno-push-args
Use PUSH operations to store outgoing parameters.  This method is shorter
and usually equally fast as method using SUB/MOV operations and is enabled
by default.  In some cases disabling it may improve performance because of
improved scheduling and reduced dependencies.

@item -maccumulate-outgoing-args
@opindex maccumulate-outgoing-args
If enabled, the maximum amount of space required for outgoing arguments is
computed in the function prologue.  This is faster on most modern CPUs
because of reduced dependencies, improved scheduling and reduced stack usage
when the preferred stack boundary is not equal to 2.  The drawback is a notable
increase in code size.  This switch implies @option{-mno-push-args}.

@item -mthreads
@opindex mthreads
Support thread-safe exception handling on MinGW.  Programs that rely
on thread-safe exception handling must compile and link all code with the
@option{-mthreads} option.  When compiling, @option{-mthreads} defines
@option{-D_MT}; when linking, it links in a special thread helper library
@option{-lmingwthrd} which cleans up per-thread exception-handling data.

@item -mno-align-stringops
@opindex mno-align-stringops
Do not align the destination of inlined string operations.  This switch reduces
code size and improves performance in case the destination is already aligned,
but LLVM doesn't know about it.

@item -minline-all-stringops
@opindex minline-all-stringops
By default LLVM inlines string operations only when the destination is
known to be aligned to least a 4-byte boundary.
This enables more inlining and increases code
size, but may improve performance of code that depends on fast
@code{memcpy}, @code{strlen},
and @code{memset} for short lengths.

@item -minline-stringops-dynamically
@opindex minline-stringops-dynamically
For string operations of unknown size, use run-time checks with
inline code for small blocks and a library call for large blocks.

@item -mstringop-strategy=@var{alg}
@opindex mstringop-strategy=@var{alg}
Override the internal decision heuristic for the particular algorithm to use
for inlining string operations.  The allowed values for @var{alg} are:

@table @samp
@item rep_byte
@itemx rep_4byte
@itemx rep_8byte
Expand using i386 @code{rep} prefix of the specified size.

@item byte_loop
@itemx loop
@itemx unrolled_loop
Expand into an inline loop.

@item libcall
Always use a library call.
@end table

@item -mmemcpy-strategy=@var{strategy}
@opindex mmemcpy-strategy=@var{strategy}
Override the internal decision heuristic to decide if @code{__builtin_memcpy}
should be inlined and what inline algorithm to use when the expected size
of the copy operation is known. @var{strategy}
is a comma-separated list of @var{alg}:@var{max_size}:@var{dest_align} triplets.
@var{alg} is specified in @option{-mstringop-strategy}, @var{max_size} specifies
the max byte size with which inline algorithm @var{alg} is allowed.  For the last
triplet, the @var{max_size} must be @code{-1}. The @var{max_size} of the triplets
in the list must be specified in increasing order.  The minimal byte size for
@var{alg} is @code{0} for the first triplet and @code{@var{max_size} + 1} of the
preceding range.

@item -mmemset-strategy=@var{strategy}
@opindex mmemset-strategy=@var{strategy}
The option is similar to @option{-mmemcpy-strategy=} except that it is to control
@code{__builtin_memset} expansion.

@item -momit-leaf-frame-pointer
@opindex momit-leaf-frame-pointer
Don't keep the frame pointer in a register for leaf functions.  This
avoids the instructions to save, set up, and restore frame pointers and
makes an extra register available in leaf functions.  The option
@option{-fomit-leaf-frame-pointer} removes the frame pointer for leaf functions,
which might make debugging harder.

@item -mtls-direct-seg-refs
@itemx -mno-tls-direct-seg-refs
@opindex mtls-direct-seg-refs
Controls whether TLS variables may be accessed with offsets from the
TLS segment register (@code{%gs} for 32-bit, @code{%fs} for 64-bit),
or whether the thread base pointer must be added.  Whether or not this
is valid depends on the operating system, and whether it maps the
segment to cover the entire TLS area.

For systems that use the GNU C Library, the default is on.

@item -msse2avx
@itemx -mno-sse2avx
@opindex msse2avx
Specify that the assembler should encode SSE instructions with VEX
prefix.  The option @option{-mavx} turns this on by default.

@item -mfentry
@itemx -mno-fentry
@opindex mfentry
If profiling is active (@option{-pg}), put the profiling
counter call before the prologue.
Note: On x86 architectures the attribute @code{ms_hook_prologue}
isn't possible at the moment for @option{-mfentry} and @option{-pg}.

@item -mrecord-mcount
@itemx -mno-record-mcount
@opindex mrecord-mcount
If profiling is active (@option{-pg}), generate a __mcount_loc section
that contains pointers to each profiling call. This is useful for
automatically patching and out calls.

@item -mnop-mcount
@itemx -mno-nop-mcount
@opindex mnop-mcount
If profiling is active (@option{-pg}), generate the calls to
the profiling functions as nops. This is useful when they
should be patched in later dynamically. This is likely only
useful together with @option{-mrecord-mcount}.

@item -mskip-rax-setup
@itemx -mno-skip-rax-setup
@opindex mskip-rax-setup
When generating code for the x86-64 architecture with SSE extensions
disabled, @option{-skip-rax-setup} can be used to skip setting up RAX
register when there are no variable arguments passed in vector registers.

@strong{Warning:} Since RAX register is used to avoid unnecessarily
saving vector registers on stack when passing variable arguments, the
impacts of this option are callees may waste some stack space,
misbehave or jump to a random location.  LLVM 4.4 or newer don't have
those issues, regardless the RAX register value.

@item -m8bit-idiv
@itemx -mno-8bit-idiv
@opindex m8bit-idiv
On some processors, like Intel Atom, 8-bit unsigned integer divide is
much faster than 32-bit/64-bit integer divide.  This option generates a
run-time check.  If both dividend and divisor are within range of 0
to 255, 8-bit unsigned integer divide is used instead of
32-bit/64-bit integer divide.

@item -mavx256-split-unaligned-load
@itemx -mavx256-split-unaligned-store
@opindex mavx256-split-unaligned-load
@opindex mavx256-split-unaligned-store
Split 32-byte AVX unaligned load and store.

@item -mstack-protector-guard=@var{guard}
@opindex mstack-protector-guard=@var{guard}
Generate stack protection code using canary at @var{guard}.  Supported
locations are @samp{global} for global canary or @samp{tls} for per-thread
canary in the TLS block (the default).  This option has effect only when
@option{-fstack-protector} or @option{-fstack-protector-all} is specified.

@end table

These @samp{-m} switches are supported in addition to the above
on x86-64 processors in 64-bit environments.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -m32
@itemx -m64
@itemx -mx32
@itemx -m16
@opindex m32
@opindex m64
@opindex mx32
@opindex m16
Generate code for a 16-bit, 32-bit or 64-bit environment.
The @option{-m32} option sets @code{int}, @code{long}, and pointer types
to 32 bits, and
generates code that runs on any i386 system.

The @option{-m64} option sets @code{int} to 32 bits and @code{long} and pointer
types to 64 bits, and generates code for the x86-64 architecture.
For Darwin only the @option{-m64} option also turns off the @option{-fno-pic}
and @option{-mdynamic-no-pic} options.

The @option{-mx32} option sets @code{int}, @code{long}, and pointer types
to 32 bits, and
generates code for the x86-64 architecture.

The @option{-m16} option is the same as @option{-m32}, except for that
it outputs the @code{.code16gcc} assembly directive at the beginning of
the assembly output so that the binary can run in 16-bit mode.

@item -mno-red-zone
@opindex mno-red-zone
Do not use a so-called ``red zone'' for x86-64 code.  The red zone is mandated
by the x86-64 ABI; it is a 128-byte area beyond the location of the
stack pointer that is not modified by signal or interrupt handlers
and therefore can be used for temporary data without adjusting the stack
pointer.  The flag @option{-mno-red-zone} disables this red zone.

@item -mcmodel=small
@opindex mcmodel=small
Generate code for the small code model: the program and its symbols must
be linked in the lower 2 GB of the address space.  Pointers are 64 bits.
Programs can be statically or dynamically linked.  This is the default
code model.

@item -mcmodel=kernel
@opindex mcmodel=kernel
Generate code for the kernel code model.  The kernel runs in the
negative 2 GB of the address space.
This model has to be used for Linux kernel code.

@item -mcmodel=medium
@opindex mcmodel=medium
Generate code for the medium model: the program is linked in the lower 2
GB of the address space.  Small symbols are also placed there.  Symbols
with sizes larger than @option{-mlarge-data-threshold} are put into
large data or BSS sections and can be located above 2GB.  Programs can
be statically or dynamically linked.

@item -mcmodel=large
@opindex mcmodel=large
Generate code for the large model.  This model makes no assumptions
about addresses and sizes of sections.

@item -maddress-mode=long
@opindex maddress-mode=long
Generate code for long address mode.  This is only supported for 64-bit
and x32 environments.  It is the default address mode for 64-bit
environments.

@item -maddress-mode=short
@opindex maddress-mode=short
Generate code for short address mode.  This is only supported for 32-bit
and x32 environments.  It is the default address mode for 32-bit and
x32 environments.
@end table

@node x86 Windows Options
@subsection x86 Windows Options
@cindex x86 Windows Options
@cindex Windows Options for x86

These additional options are available for Microsoft Windows targets:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -mconsole
@opindex mconsole
This option
specifies that a console application is to be generated, by
instructing the linker to set the PE header subsystem type
required for console applications.
This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets and is
enabled by default on those targets.

@item -mdll
@opindex mdll
This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets.  It
specifies that a DLL---a dynamic link library---is to be
generated, enabling the selection of the required runtime
startup object and entry point.

@item -mnop-fun-dllimport
@opindex mnop-fun-dllimport
This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets.  It
specifies that the @code{dllimport} attribute should be ignored.

@item -mthread
@opindex mthread
This option is available for MinGW targets. It specifies
that MinGW-specific thread support is to be used.

@item -municode
@opindex municode
This option is available for MinGW-w64 targets.  It causes
the @code{UNICODE} preprocessor macro to be predefined, and
chooses Unicode-capable runtime startup code.

@item -mwin32
@opindex mwin32
This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets.  It
specifies that the typical Microsoft Windows predefined macros are to
be set in the pre-processor, but does not influence the choice
of runtime library/startup code.

@item -mwindows
@opindex mwindows
This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets.  It
specifies that a GUI application is to be generated by
instructing the linker to set the PE header subsystem type
appropriately.

@item -fno-set-stack-executable
@opindex fno-set-stack-executable
This option is available for MinGW targets. It specifies that
the executable flag for the stack used by nested functions isn't
set. This is necessary for binaries running in kernel mode of
Microsoft Windows, as there the User32 API, which is used to set executable
privileges, isn't available.

@item -fwritable-relocated-rdata
@opindex fno-writable-relocated-rdata
This option is available for MinGW and Cygwin targets.  It specifies
that relocated-data in read-only section is put into .data
section.  This is a necessary for older runtimes not supporting
modification of .rdata sections for pseudo-relocation.

@item -mpe-aligned-commons
@opindex mpe-aligned-commons
This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets.  It
specifies that the GNU extension to the PE file format that
permits the correct alignment of COMMON variables should be
used when generating code.  It is enabled by default if
LLVM detects that the target assembler found during configuration
supports the feature.
@end table

See also under @ref{x86 Options} for standard options.

@node XCore Options
@subsection XCore Options
@cindex XCore options

There are no options specific to the XMOS XCore architecture.

@node zSeries Options
@subsection zSeries Options
@cindex zSeries options

These are listed under @xref{S/390 and zSeries Options}.

@node Code Gen Options
@section Options for Code Generation Conventions
@cindex code generation conventions
@cindex options, code generation
@cindex run-time options

These machine-independent options control the interface conventions
used in code generation.

Most of them have both positive and negative forms; the negative form
of @option{-ffoo} is @option{-fno-foo}.  In the table below, only
one of the forms is listed---the one that is not the default.  You
can figure out the other form by either removing @samp{no-} or adding
it.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -fbounds-check
@opindex fbounds-check
For front ends that support it, generate additional code to check that
indices used to access arrays are within the declared range.  This is
currently only supported by the Java and Fortran front ends, where
this option defaults to true and false respectively.

@item -fstack-reuse=@var{reuse-level}
@opindex fstack_reuse
This option controls stack space reuse for user declared local/auto variables
and compiler generated temporaries.  @var{reuse_level} can be @samp{all},
@samp{named_vars}, or @samp{none}. @samp{all} enables stack reuse for all
local variables and temporaries, @samp{named_vars} enables the reuse only for
user defined local variables with names, and @samp{none} disables stack reuse
completely. The default value is @samp{all}. The option is needed when the
program extends the lifetime of a scoped local variable or a compiler generated
temporary beyond the end point defined by the language.  When a lifetime of
a variable ends, and if the variable lives in memory, the optimizing compiler
has the freedom to reuse its stack space with other temporaries or scoped
local variables whose live range does not overlap with it. Legacy code extending
local lifetime is likely to break with the stack reuse optimization.

For example,

@smallexample
   int *p;
   @{
     int local1;

     p = &local1;
     local1 = 10;
     ....
   @}
   @{
      int local2;
      local2 = 20;
      ...
   @}

   if (*p == 10)  // out of scope use of local1
     @{

     @}
@end smallexample

Another example:
@smallexample

   struct A
   @{
       A(int k) : i(k), j(k) @{ @}
       int i;
       int j;
   @};

   A *ap;

   void foo(const A& ar)
   @{
      ap = &ar;
   @}

   void bar()
   @{
      foo(A(10)); // temp object's lifetime ends when foo returns

      @{
        A a(20);
        ....
      @}
      ap->i+= 10;  // ap references out of scope temp whose space
                   // is reused with a. What is the value of ap->i?
   @}

@end smallexample

The lifetime of a compiler generated temporary is well defined by the C++
standard. When a lifetime of a temporary ends, and if the temporary lives
in memory, the optimizing compiler has the freedom to reuse its stack
space with other temporaries or scoped local variables whose live range
does not overlap with it. However some of the legacy code relies on
the behavior of older compilers in which temporaries' stack space is
not reused, the aggressive stack reuse can lead to runtime errors. This
option is used to control the temporary stack reuse optimization.

@item -ftrapv
@opindex ftrapv
This option generates traps for signed overflow on addition, subtraction,
multiplication operations.

@item -fwrapv
@opindex fwrapv
This option instructs the compiler to assume that signed arithmetic
overflow of addition, subtraction and multiplication wraps around
using twos-complement representation.  This flag enables some optimizations
and disables others.  This option is enabled by default for the Java
front end, as required by the Java language specification.

@item -fexceptions
@opindex fexceptions
Enable exception handling.  Generates extra code needed to propagate
exceptions.  For some targets, this implies LLVM generates frame
unwind information for all functions, which can produce significant data
size overhead, although it does not affect execution.  If you do not
specify this option, LLVM enables it by default for languages like
C++ that normally require exception handling, and disables it for
languages like C that do not normally require it.  However, you may need
to enable this option when compiling C code that needs to interoperate
properly with exception handlers written in C++.  You may also wish to
disable this option if you are compiling older C++ programs that don't
use exception handling.

@item -fnon-call-exceptions
@opindex fnon-call-exceptions
Generate code that allows trapping instructions to throw exceptions.
Note that this requires platform-specific runtime support that does
not exist everywhere.  Moreover, it only allows @emph{trapping}
instructions to throw exceptions, i.e.@: memory references or floating-point
instructions.  It does not allow exceptions to be thrown from
arbitrary signal handlers such as @code{SIGALRM}.

@item -fdelete-dead-exceptions
@opindex fdelete-dead-exceptions
Consider that instructions that may throw exceptions but don't otherwise
contribute to the execution of the program can be optimized away.
This option is enabled by default for the Ada front end, as permitted by
the Ada language specification.
Optimization passes that cause dead exceptions to be removed are enabled independently at different optimization levels.

@item -funwind-tables
@opindex funwind-tables
Similar to @option{-fexceptions}, except that it just generates any needed
static data, but does not affect the generated code in any other way.
You normally do not need to enable this option; instead, a language processor
that needs this handling enables it on your behalf.

@item -fasynchronous-unwind-tables
@opindex fasynchronous-unwind-tables
Generate unwind table in DWARF 2 format, if supported by target machine.  The
table is exact at each instruction boundary, so it can be used for stack
unwinding from asynchronous events (such as debugger or garbage collector).

@item -fno-gnu-unique
@opindex fno-gnu-unique
On systems with recent GNU assembler and C library, the C++ compiler
uses the @code{STB_GNU_UNIQUE} binding to make sure that definitions
of template static data members and static local variables in inline
functions are unique even in the presence of @code{RTLD_LOCAL}; this
is necessary to avoid problems with a library used by two different
@code{RTLD_LOCAL} plugins depending on a definition in one of them and
therefore disagreeing with the other one about the binding of the
symbol.  But this causes @code{dlclose} to be ignored for affected
DSOs; if your program relies on reinitialization of a DSO via
@code{dlclose} and @code{dlopen}, you can use
@option{-fno-gnu-unique}.

@item -fpcc-struct-return
@opindex fpcc-struct-return
Return ``short'' @code{struct} and @code{union} values in memory like
longer ones, rather than in registers.  This convention is less
efficient, but it has the advantage of allowing intercallability between
LLVM-compiled files and files compiled with other compilers, particularly
the Portable C Compiler (pcc).

The precise convention for returning structures in memory depends
on the target configuration macros.

Short structures and unions are those whose size and alignment match
that of some integer type.

@strong{Warning:} code compiled with the @option{-fpcc-struct-return}
switch is not binary compatible with code compiled with the
@option{-freg-struct-return} switch.
Use it to conform to a non-default application binary interface.

@item -freg-struct-return
@opindex freg-struct-return
Return @code{struct} and @code{union} values in registers when possible.
This is more efficient for small structures than
@option{-fpcc-struct-return}.

If you specify neither @option{-fpcc-struct-return} nor
@option{-freg-struct-return}, LLVM defaults to whichever convention is
standard for the target.  If there is no standard convention, LLVM
defaults to @option{-fpcc-struct-return}, except on targets where LLVM is
the principal compiler.  In those cases, we can choose the standard, and
we chose the more efficient register return alternative.

@strong{Warning:} code compiled with the @option{-freg-struct-return}
switch is not binary compatible with code compiled with the
@option{-fpcc-struct-return} switch.
Use it to conform to a non-default application binary interface.

@item -fshort-enums
@opindex fshort-enums
Allocate to an @code{enum} type only as many bytes as it needs for the
declared range of possible values.  Specifically, the @code{enum} type
is equivalent to the smallest integer type that has enough room.

@strong{Warning:} the @option{-fshort-enums} switch causes LLVM to generate
code that is not binary compatible with code generated without that switch.
Use it to conform to a non-default application binary interface.

@item -fshort-double
@opindex fshort-double
Use the same size for @code{double} as for @code{float}.

@strong{Warning:} the @option{-fshort-double} switch causes LLVM to generate
code that is not binary compatible with code generated without that switch.
Use it to conform to a non-default application binary interface.

@item -fshort-wchar
@opindex fshort-wchar
Override the underlying type for @code{wchar_t} to be @code{short
unsigned int} instead of the default for the target.  This option is
useful for building programs to run under WINE@.

@strong{Warning:} the @option{-fshort-wchar} switch causes LLVM to generate
code that is not binary compatible with code generated without that switch.
Use it to conform to a non-default application binary interface.

@item -fno-common
@opindex fno-common
In C code, controls the placement of uninitialized global variables.
Unix C compilers have traditionally permitted multiple definitions of
such variables in different compilation units by placing the variables
in a common block.
This is the behavior specified by @option{-fcommon}, and is the default
for LLVM on most targets.
On the other hand, this behavior is not required by ISO C, and on some
targets may carry a speed or code size penalty on variable references.
The @option{-fno-common} option specifies that the compiler should place
uninitialized global variables in the data section of the object file,
rather than generating them as common blocks.
This has the effect that if the same variable is declared
(without @code{extern}) in two different compilations,
you get a multiple-definition error when you link them.
In this case, you must compile with @option{-fcommon} instead.
Compiling with @option{-fno-common} is useful on targets for which
it provides better performance, or if you wish to verify that the
program will work on other systems that always treat uninitialized
variable declarations this way.

@item -fno-ident
@opindex fno-ident
Ignore the @code{#ident} directive.

@item -finhibit-size-directive
@opindex finhibit-size-directive
Don't output a @code{.size} assembler directive, or anything else that
would cause trouble if the function is split in the middle, and the
two halves are placed at locations far apart in memory.  This option is
used when compiling @file{crtstuff.c}; you should not need to use it
for anything else.

@item -fverbose-asm
@opindex fverbose-asm
Put extra commentary information in the generated assembly code to
make it more readable.  This option is generally only of use to those
who actually need to read the generated assembly code (perhaps while
debugging the compiler itself).

@option{-fno-verbose-asm}, the default, causes the
extra information to be omitted and is useful when comparing two assembler
files.

@item -frecord-gcc-switches
@opindex frecord-gcc-switches
This switch causes the command line used to invoke the
compiler to be recorded into the object file that is being created.
This switch is only implemented on some targets and the exact format
of the recording is target and binary file format dependent, but it
usually takes the form of a section containing ASCII text.  This
switch is related to the @option{-fverbose-asm} switch, but that
switch only records information in the assembler output file as
comments, so it never reaches the object file.
See also @option{-grecord-gcc-switches} for another
way of storing compiler options into the object file.

@item -fpic
@opindex fpic
@cindex global offset table
@cindex PIC
Generate position-independent code (PIC) suitable for use in a shared
library, if supported for the target machine.  Such code accesses all
constant addresses through a global offset table (GOT)@.  The dynamic
loader resolves the GOT entries when the program starts (the dynamic
loader is not part of LLVM; it is part of the operating system).  If
the GOT size for the linked executable exceeds a machine-specific
maximum size, you get an error message from the linker indicating that
@option{-fpic} does not work; in that case, recompile with @option{-fPIC}
instead.  (These maximums are 8k on the SPARC and 32k
on the m68k and RS/6000.  The x86 has no such limit.)

Position-independent code requires special support, and therefore works
only on certain machines.  For the x86, LLVM supports PIC for System V
but not for the Sun 386i.  Code generated for the IBM RS/6000 is always
position-independent.

When this flag is set, the macros @code{__pic__} and @code{__PIC__}
are defined to 1.

@item -fPIC
@opindex fPIC
If supported for the target machine, emit position-independent code,
suitable for dynamic linking and avoiding any limit on the size of the
global offset table.  This option makes a difference on the m68k,
PowerPC and SPARC@.

Position-independent code requires special support, and therefore works
only on certain machines.

When this flag is set, the macros @code{__pic__} and @code{__PIC__}
are defined to 2.

@item -fpie
@itemx -fPIE
@opindex fpie
@opindex fPIE
These options are similar to @option{-fpic} and @option{-fPIC}, but
generated position independent code can be only linked into executables.
Usually these options are used when @option{-pie} LLVM option is
used during linking.

@option{-fpie} and @option{-fPIE} both define the macros
@code{__pie__} and @code{__PIE__}.  The macros have the value 1
for @option{-fpie} and 2 for @option{-fPIE}.

@item -fno-jump-tables
@opindex fno-jump-tables
Do not use jump tables for switch statements even where it would be
more efficient than other code generation strategies.  This option is
of use in conjunction with @option{-fpic} or @option{-fPIC} for
building code that forms part of a dynamic linker and cannot
reference the address of a jump table.  On some targets, jump tables
do not require a GOT and this option is not needed.

@item -ffixed-@var{reg}
@opindex ffixed
Treat the register named @var{reg} as a fixed register; generated code
should never refer to it (except perhaps as a stack pointer, frame
pointer or in some other fixed role).

@var{reg} must be the name of a register.  The register names accepted
are machine-specific and are defined in the @code{REGISTER_NAMES}
macro in the machine description macro file.

This flag does not have a negative form, because it specifies a
three-way choice.

@item -fcall-used-@var{reg}
@opindex fcall-used
Treat the register named @var{reg} as an allocable register that is
clobbered by function calls.  It may be allocated for temporaries or
variables that do not live across a call.  Functions compiled this way
do not save and restore the register @var{reg}.

It is an error to use this flag with the frame pointer or stack pointer.
Use of this flag for other registers that have fixed pervasive roles in
the machine's execution model produces disastrous results.

This flag does not have a negative form, because it specifies a
three-way choice.

@item -fcall-saved-@var{reg}
@opindex fcall-saved
Treat the register named @var{reg} as an allocable register saved by
functions.  It may be allocated even for temporaries or variables that
live across a call.  Functions compiled this way save and restore
the register @var{reg} if they use it.

It is an error to use this flag with the frame pointer or stack pointer.
Use of this flag for other registers that have fixed pervasive roles in
the machine's execution model produces disastrous results.

A different sort of disaster results from the use of this flag for
a register in which function values may be returned.

This flag does not have a negative form, because it specifies a
three-way choice.

@item -fpack-struct[=@var{n}]
@opindex fpack-struct
Without a value specified, pack all structure members together without
holes.  When a value is specified (which must be a small power of two), pack
structure members according to this value, representing the maximum
alignment (that is, objects with default alignment requirements larger than
this are output potentially unaligned at the next fitting location.

@strong{Warning:} the @option{-fpack-struct} switch causes LLVM to generate
code that is not binary compatible with code generated without that switch.
Additionally, it makes the code suboptimal.
Use it to conform to a non-default application binary interface.

@item -finstrument-functions
@opindex finstrument-functions
Generate instrumentation calls for entry and exit to functions.  Just
after function entry and just before function exit, the following
profiling functions are called with the address of the current
function and its call site.  (On some platforms,
@code{__builtin_return_address} does not work beyond the current
function, so the call site information may not be available to the
profiling functions otherwise.)

@smallexample
void __cyg_profile_func_enter (void *this_fn,
                               void *call_site);
void __cyg_profile_func_exit  (void *this_fn,
                               void *call_site);
@end smallexample

The first argument is the address of the start of the current function,
which may be looked up exactly in the symbol table.

This instrumentation is also done for functions expanded inline in other
functions.  The profiling calls indicate where, conceptually, the
inline function is entered and exited.  This means that addressable
versions of such functions must be available.  If all your uses of a
function are expanded inline, this may mean an additional expansion of
code size.  If you use @code{extern inline} in your C code, an
addressable version of such functions must be provided.  (This is
normally the case anyway, but if you get lucky and the optimizer always
expands the functions inline, you might have gotten away without
providing static copies.)

A function may be given the attribute @code{no_instrument_function}, in
which case this instrumentation is not done.  This can be used, for
example, for the profiling functions listed above, high-priority
interrupt routines, and any functions from which the profiling functions
cannot safely be called (perhaps signal handlers, if the profiling
routines generate output or allocate memory).

@item -finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list=@var{file},@var{file},@dots{}
@opindex finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list

Set the list of functions that are excluded from instrumentation (see
the description of @option{-finstrument-functions}).  If the file that
contains a function definition matches with one of @var{file}, then
that function is not instrumented.  The match is done on substrings:
if the @var{file} parameter is a substring of the file name, it is
considered to be a match.

For example:

@smallexample
-finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list=/bits/stl,include/sys
@end smallexample

@noindent
excludes any inline function defined in files whose pathnames
contain @file{/bits/stl} or @file{include/sys}.

If, for some reason, you want to include letter @samp{,} in one of
@var{sym}, write @samp{\,}. For example,
@option{-finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list='\,\,tmp'}
(note the single quote surrounding the option).

@item -finstrument-functions-exclude-function-list=@var{sym},@var{sym},@dots{}
@opindex finstrument-functions-exclude-function-list

This is similar to @option{-finstrument-functions-exclude-file-list},
but this option sets the list of function names to be excluded from
instrumentation.  The function name to be matched is its user-visible
name, such as @code{vector<int> blah(const vector<int> &)}, not the
internal mangled name (e.g., @code{_Z4blahRSt6vectorIiSaIiEE}).  The
match is done on substrings: if the @var{sym} parameter is a substring
of the function name, it is considered to be a match.  For C99 and C++
extended identifiers, the function name must be given in UTF-8, not
using universal character names.

@item -fstack-check
@opindex fstack-check
Generate code to verify that you do not go beyond the boundary of the
stack.  You should specify this flag if you are running in an
environment with multiple threads, but you only rarely need to specify it in
a single-threaded environment since stack overflow is automatically
detected on nearly all systems if there is only one stack.

Note that this switch does not actually cause checking to be done; the
operating system or the language runtime must do that.  The switch causes
generation of code to ensure that they see the stack being extended.

You can additionally specify a string parameter: @samp{no} means no
checking, @samp{generic} means force the use of old-style checking,
@samp{specific} means use the best checking method and is equivalent
to bare @option{-fstack-check}.

Old-style checking is a generic mechanism that requires no specific
target support in the compiler but comes with the following drawbacks:

@enumerate
@item
Modified allocation strategy for large objects: they are always
allocated dynamically if their size exceeds a fixed threshold.

@item
Fixed limit on the size of the static frame of functions: when it is
topped by a particular function, stack checking is not reliable and
a warning is issued by the compiler.

@item
Inefficiency: because of both the modified allocation strategy and the
generic implementation, code performance is hampered.
@end enumerate

Note that old-style stack checking is also the fallback method for
@samp{specific} if no target support has been added in the compiler.

@item -fstack-limit-register=@var{reg}
@itemx -fstack-limit-symbol=@var{sym}
@itemx -fno-stack-limit
@opindex fstack-limit-register
@opindex fstack-limit-symbol
@opindex fno-stack-limit
Generate code to ensure that the stack does not grow beyond a certain value,
either the value of a register or the address of a symbol.  If a larger
stack is required, a signal is raised at run time.  For most targets,
the signal is raised before the stack overruns the boundary, so
it is possible to catch the signal without taking special precautions.

For instance, if the stack starts at absolute address @samp{0x80000000}
and grows downwards, you can use the flags
@option{-fstack-limit-symbol=__stack_limit} and
@option{-Wl,--defsym,__stack_limit=0x7ffe0000} to enforce a stack limit
of 128KB@.  Note that this may only work with the GNU linker.

@item -fsplit-stack
@opindex fsplit-stack
Generate code to automatically split the stack before it overflows.
The resulting program has a discontiguous stack which can only
overflow if the program is unable to allocate any more memory.  This
is most useful when running threaded programs, as it is no longer
necessary to calculate a good stack size to use for each thread.  This
is currently only implemented for the x86 targets running
GNU/Linux.

When code compiled with @option{-fsplit-stack} calls code compiled
without @option{-fsplit-stack}, there may not be much stack space
available for the latter code to run.  If compiling all code,
including library code, with @option{-fsplit-stack} is not an option,
then the linker can fix up these calls so that the code compiled
without @option{-fsplit-stack} always has a large stack.  Support for
this is implemented in the gold linker in GNU binutils release 2.21
and later.

@item -fleading-underscore
@opindex fleading-underscore
This option and its counterpart, @option{-fno-leading-underscore}, forcibly
change the way C symbols are represented in the object file.  One use
is to help link with legacy assembly code.

@strong{Warning:} the @option{-fleading-underscore} switch causes LLVM to
generate code that is not binary compatible with code generated without that
switch.  Use it to conform to a non-default application binary interface.
Not all targets provide complete support for this switch.

@item -ftls-model=@var{model}
@opindex ftls-model
Alter the thread-local storage model to be used (@pxref{Thread-Local}).
The @var{model} argument should be one of @samp{global-dynamic},
@samp{local-dynamic}, @samp{initial-exec} or @samp{local-exec}.
Note that the choice is subject to optimization: the compiler may use
a more efficient model for symbols not visible outside of the translation
unit, or if @option{-fpic} is not given on the command line.

The default without @option{-fpic} is @samp{initial-exec}; with
@option{-fpic} the default is @samp{global-dynamic}.

@item -fvisibility=@r{[}default@r{|}internal@r{|}hidden@r{|}protected@r{]}
@opindex fvisibility
Set the default ELF image symbol visibility to the specified option---all
symbols are marked with this unless overridden within the code.
Using this feature can very substantially improve linking and
load times of shared object libraries, produce more optimized
code, provide near-perfect API export and prevent symbol clashes.
It is @strong{strongly} recommended that you use this in any shared objects
you distribute.

Despite the nomenclature, @samp{default} always means public; i.e.,
available to be linked against from outside the shared object.
@samp{protected} and @samp{internal} are pretty useless in real-world
usage so the only other commonly used option is @samp{hidden}.
The default if @option{-fvisibility} isn't specified is
@samp{default}, i.e., make every symbol public.

A good explanation of the benefits offered by ensuring ELF
symbols have the correct visibility is given by ``How To Write
Shared Libraries'' by Ulrich Drepper (which can be found at
@w{@uref{http://www.akkadia.org/drepper/}})---however a superior
solution made possible by this option to marking things hidden when
the default is public is to make the default hidden and mark things
public.  This is the norm with DLLs on Windows and with @option{-fvisibility=hidden}
and @code{__attribute__ ((visibility("default")))} instead of
@code{__declspec(dllexport)} you get almost identical semantics with
identical syntax.  This is a great boon to those working with
cross-platform projects.

For those adding visibility support to existing code, you may find
@code{#pragma GCC visibility} of use.  This works by you enclosing
the declarations you wish to set visibility for with (for example)
@code{#pragma GCC visibility push(hidden)} and
@code{#pragma GCC visibility pop}.
Bear in mind that symbol visibility should be viewed @strong{as
part of the API interface contract} and thus all new code should
always specify visibility when it is not the default; i.e., declarations
only for use within the local DSO should @strong{always} be marked explicitly
as hidden as so to avoid PLT indirection overheads---making this
abundantly clear also aids readability and self-documentation of the code.
Note that due to ISO C++ specification requirements, @code{operator new} and
@code{operator delete} must always be of default visibility.

Be aware that headers from outside your project, in particular system
headers and headers from any other library you use, may not be
expecting to be compiled with visibility other than the default.  You
may need to explicitly say @code{#pragma GCC visibility push(default)}
before including any such headers.

@code{extern} declarations are not affected by @option{-fvisibility}, so
a lot of code can be recompiled with @option{-fvisibility=hidden} with
no modifications.  However, this means that calls to @code{extern}
functions with no explicit visibility use the PLT, so it is more
effective to use @code{__attribute ((visibility))} and/or
@code{#pragma GCC visibility} to tell the compiler which @code{extern}
declarations should be treated as hidden.

Note that @option{-fvisibility} does affect C++ vague linkage
entities. This means that, for instance, an exception class that is
be thrown between DSOs must be explicitly marked with default
visibility so that the @samp{type_info} nodes are unified between
the DSOs.

An overview of these techniques, their benefits and how to use them
is at @uref{http://gcc.gnu.org/@/wiki/@/Visibility}.

@item -fstrict-volatile-bitfields
@opindex fstrict-volatile-bitfields
This option should be used if accesses to volatile bit-fields (or other
structure fields, although the compiler usually honors those types
anyway) should use a single access of the width of the
field's type, aligned to a natural alignment if possible.  For
example, targets with memory-mapped peripheral registers might require
all such accesses to be 16 bits wide; with this flag you can
declare all peripheral bit-fields as @code{unsigned short} (assuming short
is 16 bits on these targets) to force LLVM to use 16-bit accesses
instead of, perhaps, a more efficient 32-bit access.

If this option is disabled, the compiler uses the most efficient
instruction.  In the previous example, that might be a 32-bit load
instruction, even though that accesses bytes that do not contain
any portion of the bit-field, or memory-mapped registers unrelated to
the one being updated.

In some cases, such as when the @code{packed} attribute is applied to a
structure field, it may not be possible to access the field with a single
read or write that is correctly aligned for the target machine.  In this
case LLVM falls back to generating multiple accesses rather than code that
will fault or truncate the result at run time.

Note:  Due to restrictions of the C/C++11 memory model, write accesses are
not allowed to touch non bit-field members.  It is therefore recommended
to define all bits of the field's type as bit-field members.

The default value of this option is determined by the application binary
interface for the target processor.

@item -fsync-libcalls
@opindex fsync-libcalls
This option controls whether any out-of-line instance of the @code{__sync}
family of functions may be used to implement the C++11 @code{__atomic}
family of functions.

The default value of this option is enabled, thus the only useful form
of the option is @option{-fno-sync-libcalls}.  This option is used in
the implementation of the @file{libatomic} runtime library.

@end table

@c man end

@node Environment Variables
@section Environment Variables Affecting LLVM
@cindex environment variables

@c man begin ENVIRONMENT
This section describes several environment variables that affect how LLVM
operates.  Some of them work by specifying directories or prefixes to use
when searching for various kinds of files.  Some are used to specify other
aspects of the compilation environment.

Note that you can also specify places to search using options such as
@option{-B}, @option{-I} and @option{-L} (@pxref{Directory Options}).  These
take precedence over places specified using environment variables, which
in turn take precedence over those specified by the configuration of LLVM@.
@xref{Driver,, Controlling the Compilation Driver @file{gcc}, gccint,
GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) Internals}.

@table @env
@item LANG
@itemx LC_CTYPE
@c @itemx LC_COLLATE
@itemx LC_MESSAGES
@c @itemx LC_MONETARY
@c @itemx LC_NUMERIC
@c @itemx LC_TIME
@itemx LC_ALL
@findex LANG
@findex LC_CTYPE
@c @findex LC_COLLATE
@findex LC_MESSAGES
@c @findex LC_MONETARY
@c @findex LC_NUMERIC
@c @findex LC_TIME
@findex LC_ALL
@cindex locale
These environment variables control the way that LLVM uses
localization information which allows LLVM to work with different
national conventions.  LLVM inspects the locale categories
@env{LC_CTYPE} and @env{LC_MESSAGES} if it has been configured to do
so.  These locale categories can be set to any value supported by your
installation.  A typical value is @samp{en_GB.UTF-8} for English in the United
Kingdom encoded in UTF-8.

The @env{LC_CTYPE} environment variable specifies character
classification.  LLVM uses it to determine the character boundaries in
a string; this is needed for some multibyte encodings that contain quote
and escape characters that are otherwise interpreted as a string
end or escape.

The @env{LC_MESSAGES} environment variable specifies the language to
use in diagnostic messages.

If the @env{LC_ALL} environment variable is set, it overrides the value
of @env{LC_CTYPE} and @env{LC_MESSAGES}; otherwise, @env{LC_CTYPE}
and @env{LC_MESSAGES} default to the value of the @env{LANG}
environment variable.  If none of these variables are set, LLVM
defaults to traditional C English behavior.

@item TMPDIR
@findex TMPDIR
If @env{TMPDIR} is set, it specifies the directory to use for temporary
files.  LLVM uses temporary files to hold the output of one stage of
compilation which is to be used as input to the next stage: for example,
the output of the preprocessor, which is the input to the compiler
proper.

@item GCC_COMPARE_DEBUG
@findex GCC_COMPARE_DEBUG
Setting @env{GCC_COMPARE_DEBUG} is nearly equivalent to passing
@option{-fcompare-debug} to the compiler driver.  See the documentation
of this option for more details.

@item GCC_EXEC_PREFIX
@findex GCC_EXEC_PREFIX
If @env{GCC_EXEC_PREFIX} is set, it specifies a prefix to use in the
names of the subprograms executed by the compiler.  No slash is added
when this prefix is combined with the name of a subprogram, but you can
specify a prefix that ends with a slash if you wish.

If @env{GCC_EXEC_PREFIX} is not set, LLVM attempts to figure out
an appropriate prefix to use based on the pathname it is invoked with.

If LLVM cannot find the subprogram using the specified prefix, it
tries looking in the usual places for the subprogram.

The default value of @env{GCC_EXEC_PREFIX} is
@file{@var{prefix}/lib/gcc/} where @var{prefix} is the prefix to
the installed compiler. In many cases @var{prefix} is the value
of @code{prefix} when you ran the @file{configure} script.

Other prefixes specified with @option{-B} take precedence over this prefix.

This prefix is also used for finding files such as @file{crt0.o} that are
used for linking.

In addition, the prefix is used in an unusual way in finding the
directories to search for header files.  For each of the standard
directories whose name normally begins with @samp{/usr/local/lib/gcc}
(more precisely, with the value of @env{GCC_INCLUDE_DIR}), LLVM tries
replacing that beginning with the specified prefix to produce an
alternate directory name.  Thus, with @option{-Bfoo/}, LLVM searches
@file{foo/bar} just before it searches the standard directory
@file{/usr/local/lib/bar}.
If a standard directory begins with the configured
@var{prefix} then the value of @var{prefix} is replaced by
@env{GCC_EXEC_PREFIX} when looking for header files.

@item COMPILER_PATH
@findex COMPILER_PATH
The value of @env{COMPILER_PATH} is a colon-separated list of
directories, much like @env{PATH}.  LLVM tries the directories thus
specified when searching for subprograms, if it can't find the
subprograms using @env{GCC_EXEC_PREFIX}.

@item LIBRARY_PATH
@findex LIBRARY_PATH
The value of @env{LIBRARY_PATH} is a colon-separated list of
directories, much like @env{PATH}.  When configured as a native compiler,
LLVM tries the directories thus specified when searching for special
linker files, if it can't find them using @env{GCC_EXEC_PREFIX}.  Linking
using LLVM also uses these directories when searching for ordinary
libraries for the @option{-l} option (but directories specified with
@option{-L} come first).

@item LANG
@findex LANG
@cindex locale definition
This variable is used to pass locale information to the compiler.  One way in
which this information is used is to determine the character set to be used
when character literals, string literals and comments are parsed in C and C++.
When the compiler is configured to allow multibyte characters,
the following values for @env{LANG} are recognized:

@table @samp
@item C-JIS
Recognize JIS characters.
@item C-SJIS
Recognize SJIS characters.
@item C-EUCJP
Recognize EUCJP characters.
@end table

If @env{LANG} is not defined, or if it has some other value, then the
compiler uses @code{mblen} and @code{mbtowc} as defined by the default locale to
recognize and translate multibyte characters.
@end table

@noindent
Some additional environment variables affect the behavior of the
preprocessor.

@vtable @env
@item CPATH
@itemx C_INCLUDE_PATH
@itemx CPLUS_INCLUDE_PATH
@itemx OBJC_INCLUDE_PATH
@c Commented out until ObjC++ is part of LLVM:
@c @itemx OBJCPLUS_INCLUDE_PATH
Each variable's value is a list of directories separated by a special
character, much like @env{PATH}, in which to look for header files.
The special character, @code{PATH_SEPARATOR}, is target-dependent and
determined at LLVM build time.  For Microsoft Windows-based targets it is a
semicolon, and for almost all other targets it is a colon.

@env{CPATH} specifies a list of directories to be searched as if
specified with @option{-I}, but after any paths given with @option{-I}
options on the command line.  This environment variable is used
regardless of which language is being preprocessed.

The remaining environment variables apply only when preprocessing the
particular language indicated.  Each specifies a list of directories
to be searched as if specified with @option{-isystem}, but after any
paths given with @option{-isystem} options on the command line.

In all these variables, an empty element instructs the compiler to
search its current working directory.  Empty elements can appear at the
beginning or end of a path.  For instance, if the value of
@env{CPATH} is @code{:/special/include}, that has the same
effect as @samp{@w{-I. -I/special/include}}.

@c man end
@c man begin ENVIRONMENT

@item DEPENDENCIES_OUTPUT
@cindex dependencies for make as output
If this variable is set, its value specifies how to output
dependencies for Make based on the non-system header files processed
by the compiler.  System header files are ignored in the dependency
output.

The value of @env{DEPENDENCIES_OUTPUT} can be just a file name, in
which case the Make rules are written to that file, guessing the target
name from the source file name.  Or the value can have the form
@samp{@var{file} @var{target}}, in which case the rules are written to
file @var{file} using @var{target} as the target name.

In other words, this environment variable is equivalent to combining
the options @option{-MM} and @option{-MF} (@pxref{Preprocessor
Options}), with an optional @option{-MT} switch too.

@item SUNPRO_DEPENDENCIES
@cindex dependencies for make as output
This variable is the same as @env{DEPENDENCIES_OUTPUT} (see above),
except that system header files are not ignored, so it implies
@option{-M} rather than @option{-MM}.  However, the dependence on the
main input file is omitted.  @xref{Preprocessor Options}.
@end vtable

@c man end

@node Precompiled Headers
@section Using Precompiled Headers
@cindex precompiled headers
@cindex speed of compilation

Often large projects have many header files that are included in every
source file.  The time the compiler takes to process these header files
over and over again can account for nearly all of the time required to
build the project.  To make builds faster, LLVM allows you to
@dfn{precompile} a header file.

To create a precompiled header file, simply compile it as you would any
other file, if necessary using the @option{-x} option to make the driver
treat it as a C or C++ header file.  You may want to use a
tool like @command{make} to keep the precompiled header up-to-date when
the headers it contains change.

A precompiled header file is searched for when @code{#include} is
seen in the compilation.  As it searches for the included file
(@pxref{Search Path,,Search Path,cpp,The C Preprocessor}) the
compiler looks for a precompiled header in each directory just before it
looks for the include file in that directory.  The name searched for is
the name specified in the @code{#include} with @samp{.gch} appended.  If
the precompiled header file can't be used, it is ignored.

For instance, if you have @code{#include "all.h"}, and you have
@file{all.h.gch} in the same directory as @file{all.h}, then the
precompiled header file is used if possible, and the original
header is used otherwise.

Alternatively, you might decide to put the precompiled header file in a
directory and use @option{-I} to ensure that directory is searched
before (or instead of) the directory containing the original header.
Then, if you want to check that the precompiled header file is always
used, you can put a file of the same name as the original header in this
directory containing an @code{#error} command.

This also works with @option{-include}.  So yet another way to use
precompiled headers, good for projects not designed with precompiled
header files in mind, is to simply take most of the header files used by
a project, include them from another header file, precompile that header
file, and @option{-include} the precompiled header.  If the header files
have guards against multiple inclusion, they are skipped because
they've already been included (in the precompiled header).

If you need to precompile the same header file for different
languages, targets, or compiler options, you can instead make a
@emph{directory} named like @file{all.h.gch}, and put each precompiled
header in the directory, perhaps using @option{-o}.  It doesn't matter
what you call the files in the directory; every precompiled header in
the directory is considered.  The first precompiled header
encountered in the directory that is valid for this compilation is
used; they're searched in no particular order.

There are many other possibilities, limited only by your imagination,
good sense, and the constraints of your build system.

A precompiled header file can be used only when these conditions apply:

@itemize
@item
Only one precompiled header can be used in a particular compilation.

@item
A precompiled header can't be used once the first C token is seen.  You
can have preprocessor directives before a precompiled header; you cannot
include a precompiled header from inside another header.

@item
The precompiled header file must be produced for the same language as
the current compilation.  You can't use a C precompiled header for a C++
compilation.

@item
The precompiled header file must have been produced by the same compiler
binary as the current compilation is using.

@item
Any macros defined before the precompiled header is included must
either be defined in the same way as when the precompiled header was
generated, or must not affect the precompiled header, which usually
means that they don't appear in the precompiled header at all.

The @option{-D} option is one way to define a macro before a
precompiled header is included; using a @code{#define} can also do it.
There are also some options that define macros implicitly, like
@option{-O} and @option{-Wdeprecated}; the same rule applies to macros
defined this way.

@item If debugging information is output when using the precompiled
header, using @option{-g} or similar, the same kind of debugging information
must have been output when building the precompiled header.  However,
a precompiled header built using @option{-g} can be used in a compilation
when no debugging information is being output.

@item The same @option{-m} options must generally be used when building
and using the precompiled header.  @xref{Submodel Options},
for any cases where this rule is relaxed.

@item Each of the following options must be the same when building and using
the precompiled header:

@gccoptlist{-fexceptions}

@item
Some other command-line options starting with @option{-f},
@option{-p}, or @option{-O} must be defined in the same way as when
the precompiled header was generated.  At present, it's not clear
which options are safe to change and which are not; the safest choice
is to use exactly the same options when generating and using the
precompiled header.  The following are known to be safe:

@gccoptlist{-fmessage-length=  -fpreprocessed  -fsched-interblock @gol
-fsched-spec  -fsched-spec-load  -fsched-spec-load-dangerous @gol
-fsched-verbose=@var{number}  -fschedule-insns  -fvisibility= @gol
-pedantic-errors}

@end itemize

For all of these except the last, the compiler automatically
ignores the precompiled header if the conditions aren't met.  If you
find an option combination that doesn't work and doesn't cause the
precompiled header to be ignored, please consider filing a bug report,
see @ref{Bugs}.

If you do use differing options when generating and using the
precompiled header, the actual behavior is a mixture of the
behavior for the options.  For instance, if you use @option{-g} to
generate the precompiled header but not when using it, you may or may
not get debugging information for routines in the precompiled header.
