\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename llvm.info
@c INTERNALS is used by md.texi to determine whether to include the
@c whole of that file, in the internals manual, or only the part
@c dealing with constraints, in the user manual.
@clear INTERNALS

@c NOTE: checks/things to do:
@c
@c -have bob do a search in all seven files for "mew" (ideally --mew,
@c  but i may have forgotten the occasional "--"..).
@c     Just checked... all have `--'!  Bob 22Jul96
@c     Use this to search:   grep -n '\-\-mew' *.texi
@c -item/itemx, text after all (sub/sub)section titles, etc..
@c -consider putting the lists of options on pp 17--> etc in columns or
@c  some such.
@c -overfulls.  do a search for "mew" in the files, and you will see
@c   overfulls that i noted but could not deal with.
@c -have to add text:  beginning of chapter 8

@c
@c anything else?                       --mew 10feb93

@include gcc-common.texi

@settitle Using the Clang/LLVM Compiler System

@c Create a separate index for command line options.
@defcodeindex op
@c Merge the standard indexes into a single one.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp

@paragraphindent 1

@c %**end of header

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2015 Embecosm Limited@*
Copyright @copyright{} 1988-2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``Funding Free Software'', the Front-Cover
Texts being (a, c) (see below), and with the Back-Cover Texts being
(b, d) (see below).  A copy of the license is included in the section
entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.

(c) Embecosm's Front-Cover Text is:

     Derivative Manual for LLVM

(d) Embecosm's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this manual.  Copies
     published by Embecosm support introducing others to free and open
     source software and hardware.
@end copying
@ifnottex
@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* llvm: (llvm).                The LLVM compiler
@end direntry
This file documents the use of the LLVM compiler.
@sp 1
@insertcopying
@sp 1
@end ifnottex

@setchapternewpage odd
@titlepage
@title Using the Clang/LLVM Compiler

@c subtitles
@subtitle Derived from ``Using the GNU Compiler Collection''
@subtitle GCC version of @value{versiondate-GCC}
@sp 1
@subtitle This manual is for Clang/@sc{LLVM} version @value{version-LLVM}
@subtitle Tool chain package version @value{VERSION_PACKAGE}

@c Even if there are no authors, the second titlepage line should be
@c forced to the bottom of the page.
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll

@author Jeremy Bennett
@author Richard M. Stallman and the @sc{GCC} Developer Community
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Published by:
@multitable @columnfractions 0.5 0.5
@item Embecosm
@tab Website: @uref{http://www.embecosm.com}
@item Palamos House #208
@tab Email: @email{info@@embecosm.cm}
@item 66/67 High Street
@tab Tel: +44 1590 610184
@item Lymington
@tab
@item SO41 9AL
@tab
@end multitable
@sp 3

@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@summarycontents
@contents
@page

@node Top, Clang and LLVM,, (DIR)
@top Introduction
@cindex introduction

This manual documents how to use the Clang/LLVM compiler system as
well as its features and incompatibilities, and how to report bugs.
It corresponds to Clang/LLVM version @value{version-LLVM} as part of
tool chain version @value{VERSION_PACKAGE}.

This manual is a derivative of the GNU Compiler Collection manual,
prepared in compliance with the GNU Free Documentation License
(@acronym{GFDL}).

The internals of the LLVM compiler, including how to port it to new
targets and how to write front ends for new languages, are documented
online at @url{http://llvm.org} and elsewhere.

@menu
* Clang and LLVM::  You can compile C or C++ programs.
* Standards::       Language standards supported by GCC.
* Invoking LLVM::   Command options supported by @samp{gcc}.
* C Implementation:: How GCC implements the ISO C specification.
* C++ Implementation:: How GCC implements the ISO C++ specification.
* C Extensions::    GNU extensions to the C language family.
* C++ Extensions::  GNU extensions to the C++ language.
* Objective-C::     GNU Objective-C runtime features.
* Compatibility::   Binary Compatibility
* Trouble::         If you have trouble using GCC.
* Bugs::            How, why and where to report bugs.
* Service::         How To Get Help with GCC
* Contributing::    How to contribute to testing and developing GCC.

* Funding::         How to help assure funding for free software.
* GNU Project::     The GNU Project and GNU/Linux.

* Copying::         GNU General Public License says
                    how you can copy and share GCC.
* GNU Free Documentation License:: How you can copy and share this manual.
* Contributors::    People who have contributed to GCC.

* Option Index::    Index to command line options.
* Keyword Index::   Index of concepts and symbol names.
@end menu

@include frontends.texi
@include standards.texi
@include invoke.texi
@include implement-c.texi
@include implement-cxx.texi
@include extend.texi
@include objc.texi
@include compat.texi
@include trouble.texi
@include bugreport.texi
@include service.texi
@include contribute.texi

@include funding.texi
@include gnu.texi
@include gpl_v3.texi

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c GFDL
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@include fdl.texi

@include contrib.texi

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Indexes
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Option Index
@unnumbered Option Index

GCC's command line options are indexed here without any initial @samp{-}
or @samp{--}.  Where an option has both positive and negative forms
(such as @option{-f@var{option}} and @option{-fno-@var{option}}),
relevant entries in the manual are indexed under the most appropriate
form; it may sometimes be useful to look up both forms.

@printindex op

@node Keyword Index
@unnumbered Keyword Index

@printindex cp

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Epilogue
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@bye
